GettingThingsDoneThe Art ofStress-Free ProductivityDavid AllenPraise for Getting Things Done"The Season's Best Reads for Work-Life Advice .. . my favoriteon organizing your life: Getting Things Done . . . offers help build-ing the new mental skills needed in an age of multitasking andoverload."—Sue Shellenbarger, The Wall Street Journal"I recently attended David's seminar on getting organized, and afterseeing him in action I have hope . .. David Allen's seminar was aneye-opener."—Stewart Alsop, Fortune"Allen drops down from high-level philosophizing to the fine detailsof time management. Take a minute to check this one out."—Mark Henricks, Entrepreneur"David Allen's productivity principles are rooted in big ideas ...but they're also eminently practical."—Keith H. Hammonds, Fast Company"David Allen brings new clarity to the power of purpose, theessential nature of relaxation, and deceptively simple guidelinesfor getting things done. He employs extensive experience, per-sonal stories, and his own recipe for simplicity, speed, and fun."—Frances Hesselbein, chairman, board of governors,The Drucker Foundation"Anyone who reads this book can apply this knowledge and theseskills in their lives for immediate results."—Stephen P. Magee, chaired professor of business andeconomics, University of Texas at Austin"A true skeptic of most management fixes, I have to say David'sprogram is a winner!"—Joline Godfrey, CEO, Independent Means, Inc. andauthor of Our Wildest Dreams"Getting Things Done describes an incredibly practical process thatcan help busy people regain control of their lives. It can help yoube more successful. Even more important, it can help you have ahappier life!"—Marshall Goldsmith, coeditor, The Leader of the Futureand Coaching for Leadership"WARNING: Reading Getting Things Done can be hazardousto your old habits of procrastination. David Allen's approach isrefreshingly simple and intuitive. He provides the systems, tools,and tips to achieve profound results."—Carola Endicott, director, Quality Resources, NewEngland Medical CenterPENGUIN  BOOKSGETTING THINGS DONEDavid Allen has been called one of the world's most influentialthinkers on productivity and has been a keynote speaker andfacilitator for such organizations as New York Life, the WorldBank, the Ford Foundation, L.L. Bean, and the U.S. Navy, andhe conducts workshops for individuals and organizations acrossthe country. He is the president of The David Allen Companyand has more than twenty years experience as a managementconsultant and executive coach. His work has been featured inFast Company, Fortune, the Los Angeles Times, The New York Times,The Wall Street Journal, and many other publications. GettingThings Done has been published in twelve foreign countries.David Allen lives in Ojai, California.PENGUIN BOOKSPublished by the Penguin GroupPenguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, EnglandPenguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, AustraliaPenguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, IndiaPenguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland, New ZealandPenguin Books {South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South AfricaPenguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, EnglandFirst published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin,a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 2001Published in Penguin Books 20035    7    9    10    8    6Copyright © David Allen, 2001All rights reservedTHE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGEDTHE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:Allen, David.Getting things done : the art of stress-free productivity / David Allen.p.    cm.Includes index.ISBN 0-670-89924-0 (he.)ISBN 0 14 20.0028 0 (pbk.)1. Time management.   2. Self-management (Psychology).    I. Title.BF637.T5 A45 2001646.7—dc21       00-043757Printed in the United States of AmericaSet in Adobe CaslonDesigned by Sara E. StemenExcept in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to thecondition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out,or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of bindingor cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar conditionincluding this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.For Kathryn, my extraordinary partner in life and workviiiACKNOWLEDGMENTSFinally, deepest thanks go to my spiritual coach, J-R, forbeing such an awesome guide and consistent reminder of my realpriorities; and to my incredible wife, Kathryn, for her trust, love,hard work, and the beauty she has brought into my life.ContentsAcknowledgments viiWelcome to Getting Things DonexiPart 1: The Art of Getting Things Done 1Chapter 1   A New Practice for a New Reality 3Chapter 2    Getting Control of Your Life:The Five Stages of Mastering Workflow 24Chapter 3    Getting Projects Creatively UnderWay: The Five Phases of Project Planning 54Part 2: Practicing Stress-Free Productivity 83Chapter 4    Getting Started: Setting Up the Time,Space, and Tools85Chapter 5   Collection: Corralling Your "Stuff" 104Chapter 6    Processing: Getting "In" to Empty 119Chapter 7   Organizing: Setting Up the Right Buckets   138ixXCONTENTSChapter 8    Reviewing: Keeping YourSystem Functional 181Chapter 9    Doing: Making the BestAction Choices191Chapter 10    Getting Projects Under Control 211Part 3: The Power of the Key Principles 223Chapter 11    The Power of the Collection Habit 225Chapter 12   The Power of the Next-ActionDecision236Chapter 13   The Power of Outcome Focusing 249Conclusion257Index261Welcome to Getting Things DoneWELCOME TO A gold mine of insights into strategies for how to havemore energy, be more relaxed, and get a lot more accomplishedwith much less effort. If you're like me, you like getting thingsdone and doing them well, and yet you also want to savor life inways that seem increasingly elusive if not downright impossible ifyou're working too hard. This doesn't have to be an e i t h e r - o rproposition. It is possible to be effectively doing while you aredelightfully being, in your ordinary workaday world.I think efficiency is a good thing. Maybe what you're doing isimportant, interesting, or useful; or maybe it isn't but it has to bedone anyway. In the first case you want to get as much return asyou can on your investment of time and energy. Inthe second, you want to get on to other things as fastas you can, without any nagging loose ends.And whatever you're doing, you'd probably like tobe more relaxed, confident that whatever you're doingat the moment is just what you need to be doing—thathaving a beer with your staff after hours, gazing at yoursleeping child in his or her crib at midnight, answeringthe e-mail in front of you, or spending a few informalminutes with the potential new client after the meetingis exactly what you ought to be doing, as you're doing it.Teaching you how to be maximally efficient andrelaxed, whenever you need or want to be, was my main purposein writing this book.xiThe art of restingthe mind and thepower ofdismissing from itall care and worryis probably one ofthe secrets of ourgreat men.—Captain].A.xiiWELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONEI have searched for a long time, as you may have, for answersto the questions of what to do, when to do it, and how to do it.And after twenty-plus years of developing and applying newmethods for personal and organizational productivity, alongsideyears of rigorous exploration in the self-development arena, I canattest that there is no single, once-and-for-all solution. No soft-ware, seminar, cool personal planner, or personal mission state-ment will simplify your workday or make your choices for you asyou move through your day, week, and life. What's more, justwhen you learn how to enhance your productivity and decision-making at one level, you'll graduate to the next accepted batch ofresponsibilities and creative goals, whose new challenges will defythe ability of any simple formula or buzzword-du-jour to get youwhat you want, the way you want to get it.But if there's no single means of perfecting personal organi-zation and productivity, there are things we can do to facilitatethem. As I have personally matured, from year to year, I've founddeeper and more meaningful, more significant things to focus onand be aware of and do. And I've uncovered simple processes thatwe can all learn to use that will vastly improve our ability to dealproactively and constructively with the mundane realities of theworld.What follows is a compilation of more than two decades'worth of discoveries about personal productivity—a guide tomaximizing output and minimizing input, and to doing so in aworld in which work is increasingly voluminous and ambiguous. Ihave spent many thousands of hours coaching people "in thetrenches" at their desks, helping them process and organize all oftheir work at hand. The methods I have uncovered have proved tobe highly effective in all types of organizations, at every job level,across cultures, and even at home and school. After twenty yearsof coaching and training some of the world's most sophisticatedand productive professionals, I know the world is hungry for thesemethods.Executives at the top are looking to instill "ruthless execu-WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONEtion" in themselves and their people as a basic standard. Theyknow, and I know, that behind closed doors, after hours, thereremain unanswered calls, tasks to be delegated, unprocessed issuesfrom meetings and conversations, personal responsibilitiesunmanaged, and dozens of e-mails still not dealt with. Many ofthese businesspeople are successful because the crises they solveand the opportunities they take advantage of are bigger than theproblems they allow and create in their own offices and briefcases.But given the pace of business and life today, the equation is inquestion.On the one hand, we need proven tools that can help peoplefocus their energies strategically and tactically without lettinganything fall through the cracks. On the other, we need to creatework environments and skills that will keep the most investedpeople from burning out due to stress. We need positive work-style standards that will attract and retain the best and brightest.We know this information is sorely needed in organizations.It's also needed in schools, where our kids are still not beingtaught how to process information, how to focus on outcomes, orwhat actions to take to make them happen. And for all of us indi-vidually, it's needed so we can take advantage of all the opportuni-ties we're given to add value to our world in a sustainable,self-nurturing way.The power, simplicity, and effectiveness of what I'm talking aboutin Getting Things Done are best experienced as experiences, in realtime, with real situations in your real world. Necessarily, the bookmust put the essence of this dynamic art of workflow manage-ment and personal productivity into a linear format. I've triedto organize it in such a way as to give you both the inspiring big-picture view and a taste of immediate results as you go along.The book is divided into three parts. Part 1 describes thewhole game, providing a brief overview of the system and anexplanation of why it's unique and timely, and then presenting thebasic methodologies themselves in their most condensed andxiiixivWELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONEbasic form. Part 2 shows you how to implement the system.It's your personal coaching, step by step, on the nitty-gritty appli-cation of the models. Part 3 goes even deeper, describing thesubtler and more profound results you can expect when you incor-porate the methodologies and models into your work and yourlife.I want you to hop in. I want you to test this stuff out, evenchallenge it. I want you to find out for yourself that what I prom-ise is not only possible but instantly accessible to you personally.And I want you to know that everything I propose is easy to do. Itinvolves no new skills at all. You already know how to focus, howto write things down, how to decide on outcomes and actions, andhow to review options and make choices. You'll validate thatmany of the things you've been doing instinctively and intuitivelyall along are right. I'll give you ways to leverage those basic skillsinto new plateaus of effectiveness. I want to inspire you to put allthis into a new behavior set that will blow your mind.Throughout the book I refer to my coaching and seminarson this material. I've worked as a "management consultant" forthe last two decades, alone and in small partnerships. My workhas consisted primarily of doing private productivity coachingand conducting seminars based on the methods presented here. I(and my colleagues) have coached more than a thousand indi-viduals, trained hundreds of thousands of professionals, and deliv-ered many hundreds of public seminars; This is the backgroundfrom which I have drawn my experience and examples.The promise here was well described by a client of mine whowrote, "When I habitually applied the tenets of this program itsaved my life . . . when I faithfully applied them, it changed my life.This is a vaccination against day-to-day fire-fighting (the so-called urgent and crisis demands of any given workday) and anantidote for the imbalance many people bring upon themselves."Getting Things DonepartThe Art of GettingThings DoneA New Practice for a New RealityIT'S POSSIBLE FOR a person to have an overwhelming number ofthings to do and still function productively with a clear head and apositive sense of relaxed control. That's a great way to live andwork, at elevated levels of effectiveness and efficiency. It's alsobecoming a critical operational style required of successful andhigh-performing professionals. You already know how t o  d oeverything necessary to achieve this high-performance state. Ifyou're like most people, however, you need to apply these skills ina more timely, complete, and systematic way so you can get on topof it all instead of feeling buried. And though themethod and the techniques I describe in this bookare immensely practical and based on common sense,most people will have some major work habits thatmust be modified before they can implement thissystem. The small changes required—changes in theway you clarify and organize all the things that com-mand your attention—could represent a significantshift in how you approach some key aspects of your day-to-daywork. Many of my clients have referred to this as a si gni f icantparadigm shift.The methods I present here are all based on two key objec-tives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get done—now, later,someday, big, little, or in between—into a logical and trusted sys-tem outside of your head and off your mind; and (2) discipliningyourself to make front-end decisions about all of me "inputs" you3
Anxiety is causedby a lack of control,organization,preparation, andaction..  —David4THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONElet into your life so that you will always have a plan for "nextactions" that you can implement or renegotiate at any moment.This book offers a proven method for this kind of high-performance workflow management. It provides good tools, tips,techniques, and tricks for implementation. As you'll discover, theprinciples and methods are instantly usable and applicable toeverything you have to do in your personal as well as your profes-sional life.* You can incorporate, as many others have before you,what I describe as an ongoing dynamic style of operating in yourwork and in your world. Or, like still others, you can simply usethis as a guide to getting back into better control when you feelyou need to.The Problem: New Demands,Insufficient ResourcesAlmost everyone I encounter these days feels he or she has toomuch to handle and not enough time to get it all done. In thecourse of a single recent week, I consulted with a partner in amajor global investment firm who was concerned that the newcorporate-management responsibilities he was being offeredwould stress his family commitments beyond the limits; and witha midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay on top of her150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal of doublingthe company's regional office staff from eleven hundred to twothousand people in one year, all as she tried to protect a social lifefor herself on the weekends.A paradox has emerged in this new millennium: people have*I consider "work," in its most universal sense, as meaning anything that youwant or need to be different than it currently is. Many people make a distinc-tion between "work" and "personal life," but I don't: to me, weeding the gardenor updating my will is just as much "work" as writing this book or coaching aclient. All the methods and techniques in this book are applicable across thatlife/work spectrum—to be effective, they need to be.CHAPTER 1   |  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYenhanced quality of life, but at the same time they are adding totheir stress levels by taking on more than they have resources tohandle. It's as though their eyes were bigger than their stomachs.And most people are to some degree frustrated and perplexedabout how to improve the situation.Work No Longer Has Clear BoundariesA major factor in the mounting stress level is that t h eactual nature of our jobs has changed much more dra-matically and rapidly than have our training for andour ability to deal with work. In just the last half ofthe twentieth century, what constituted "work" in theindustrialized world was transformed from assembly-line, make-it and move-it kinds of activity to whatPeter Drucker has so aptly termed "knowledge work."In the old days, work was self-evident. Fieldswere to be plowed, machines tooled, boxes packed,cows milked, widgets cranked. You knew what work had to bedone—you could see it. It was clear when the work was finished,or not finished.Now, for many of us, there are no edges to most of our proj-ects. Most people I know have at least half a dozen things they'retrying to achieve right now, and even if they had therest of their lives to try, they wouldn't be able to finishthese to perfection. You're probably faced with thesame dilemma. How good could that conferencepotentially be? How effective could the training pro-gram be, or the structure of your executives' compen-sation package? How inspiring is the essay you'rewriting? How motivating the staff meeting? Howfunctional the reorganization? And a last question:How much available data could be relevant to doing those proj-ects "better"? The answer is, an infinite amount, easily accessible,or at least potentially so, through the Web.On another front, the lack of edges can create more work5Time is thequality of naturethat keeps eventsfrom happening allat once. Lately itdoesn't seem to beworking.—Anonymous
Almost everyproject could bedone better, and aninfinite quantity ofinformation is nowavailable that couldmake that happen.THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEfor everyone. Many of today's organizational outcomes requirecross-divisional communication, cooperation, and engagement.Our individual office silos are crumbling, and with them is goingthe luxury of not having to read cc'd e-mails from the marketingdepartment, or from human resources, or from some ad hoc, deal-with-a-certain-issue committee.Our Jobs Keep ChangingThe disintegrating edges of our projects and our work in generalwould be challenging enough for anyone. But now we must addto that equation the constantly shifting definition of our jobs. Ioften ask in my seminars, "Which of you are doing only what youwere hired to do?" Seldom do I get a raised hand. As amorphousas edgeless work may be, if you had the chance to stick with somespecifically described job long enough, you'd probably figure outwhat you needed to do—how much, at what level—to staysane.But few have that luxury anymore, for two reasons:We can neverreally be preparedfor that which iswholly new. Wehave to adjust  , •ourselves, andevery radicaladjustment is acrisis in self-esteem: we undergoa test, we have toprove ourselves. Itneeds subordinateself-confidence toface drastic changewithout innertrembling.—EricHoffer1|   T h e  o r g a n i z a t i o n s  w e ' r e  i n v o l v e d  w i t h  s e e m  t obe in constant morph mode, with ever-changinggoals, products, partners, customers, markets,technologies, and owners. These all, by neces-sity, shake up structures, forms, roles, andresponsibilities.2|   T h e  a v e r a g e  p r o f e s s i o n a l  i s  m o r e  o f  a  f r e e  a g e ntthese days than ever before, changing careers asoften as his or her parents once changed jobs.Even fortysomethings and fiftysomethings holdto standards of continual growth. Their aims arejust more integrated into the mainstream now,covered by the catchall "professional, manage-ment, and executive development"—which sim-ply means they won't keep doing what they'redoing for any extended period of time.6CHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYLittle seems clear for very long anymore, as far as what ourwork is and what or how much input may be relevantto doing it well. We're allowing in huge amounts ofinformation and communication from the outerworld and generating an equally large volume ofideas and agreements with ourselves and others fromour inner world. And we haven't been well equipped to deal withthis huge number of internal and external commitments.The Old Models and Habits Are InsufficientNeither our standard education, nor traditional time-managementmodels, nor the plethora of organizing tools available, such aspersonal notebook planners, Microsoft Outlook, or Palm per-sonal digital assistants (PDAs), has given us a viable means ofmeeting the new demands placed on us. If you've tried to use anyof these processes or tools, you've probably foundthem unable to accommodate the speed, complexity,and changing priority factors inherent in what youare doing. The ability to be successful, relaxed, and incontrol  during these  fertile  but turbulent timesdemands new ways of thinking and working. Thereis a great need for new methods, technologies, andwork habits to help us get on top of our world.The traditional approaches to time management and per-sonal organization were useful in their time. They provided help-ful reference points for a workforce that was just emerging froman industrial assembly-line modality into a new kind of work thatincluded choices about what to do and discretion about when todo it. When "time" itself turned into a work factor, personal cal-endars became a key work tool. (Even as late as the 1980s manyprofessionals considered having a pocket Day-Timer the essenceof being organized, and many people today think of their calendaras the central tool for being in control.) Along with discretionarytime also came the need to make good choices about what to do."ABC" priority codes and daily "to-do" lists were key techniques7The burner I go,the behinder I get.—Anonymous
The winds andwaves are alwayson the side of theablest navigators.—Edward Gibbon8THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONEthat people developed to help them sort through their choices insome meaningful way. If you had the freedom to decide what todo, you also had the responsibility to make good choices, givenyour "priorities."What you've probably discovered, at least at some level, isthat a calendar, though important, can really effectively manageonly a small portion of what you need to organize. And dailyto-do lists and simplified priority coding have proven inadequateto deal with the volume and variable nature of the average profes-sional's workload. More and more people's jobs are made up ofdozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day, with no latitude left toignore a single request, complaint, or order. There are few peoplewho can (or even should) expect to code everything an "A," a "B,"or a "C" priority, or who can maintain some predetermined list ofto-dos that the first telephone call or interruption from their bosswon't totally undo.The "Big Picture" vs. the Nitty-GrittyAt the other end of the spectrum, a huge number of businessbooks, models, seminars, and gurus have championed the "biggerview" as the solution to dealing with our complex world. Clarify-ing major goals and values, so the thinking goes, gives order,meaning, and direction to our work. In practice, however, thewell-intentioned exercise of values thinking too often does notachieve its desired results. I have seen too many of these effortsfail, for one or more of the following three reasons:1|    T h e r e  i s  t o o  m u c h  d i s t r a c t i o n  a t  t h e  d a y - t o - d ay, hour-to-hour level of commitments to allow for appropriate focus onthe higher levels.2|    I n e f f e c t i v e  p e r s o n a l  o r g a n i z a t i o n a l  s y s t e m s  c reate huge sub-conscious resistance to undertaking even bigger projects andgoals that will likely not be managed well, and that will inturn cause even more distraction and stress.3|    W h e n  l o f t i e r  l e v e l s  a n d  v a l u e s  a c t u a l l y  are clarified, it raisesCHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYthe bar of our standards, making us notice thatmuch more that needs changing. We are alreadyhaving a serious negative reaction to the over-whelming number of things we have to do. Andwhat created much of the work that's on thoselists in the first place? Our values!Focusing on valuesdoes not simplifyyour life. It givesmeaning anddirection—and alotmore complexity.Focusing on primary outcomes and values is a critical exer-cise, certainly. But it does not mean there is less to do, or fewerchallenges in getting the work done. Quite the contrary: it justups the ante in the game, which still must be played day to day.For a human-resources executive, for example, deciding to dealwith quality-of-work-life issues in order to attract and keep keytalent does not make things simpler.There has been a missing piece in our new culture of knowl-edge work: a system with a coherent set of behaviors and toolsthat functions effectively at the level at which work really hap-pens. It must incorporate the results of big-picture thinkingas well as the smallest of open details. It must manage multi-ple tiers of priorities. It must maintain control over hundredsof new inputs daily. It must save a lot more time and effort thanare needed to maintain it. It must make it easier to get thingsdone.The Promise: The "Ready State"of the Martial ArtistReflect for a moment on what it actually might be like if your per-sonal management situation were totally under control, at all lev-els and at all times. What if you could dedicate fully 100 percentof your attention to whatever was at hand, at your own choosing,with no distraction?It is possible. There is a way to get a grip on it all, stayrelaxed, and get meaningful things done with minimal effort,9THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONELife is denied bylack of attention, whether it be tocleaning windowsor trying to writea masterpiece..—NadiaBoulangerYour ability togenerate power isdirectly proportionalto your ability torelax.across the whole spectrum of your life and work. Youcan experience what the martial artists call a "mindlike water" and top athletes refer to as the "zone,"within the complex world in which you're engaged.In fact, you have probably already been in this statefrom time to time.It's a condition of working, doing, and being inwhich the mind is clear and constructive things arehappening. It's a state that is accessible by everyone,and one that is increasingly needed to deal effectivelywith the complexity of life in the twenty-first century.More and more it will be a required condition forhigh-performance professionals who wish to maintainbalance and a consistent positive output in their work.World-class rower Craig Lambert has described howit feels in Mind Over Water (Houghton Miffin, 1998):
10Rowers have a word for this frictionless state: swing. . . . Recallthe pure joy of riding on a backyard swing: an easy cycle ofmotion, the momentum coming from the swing itself. The swingcarries us; we do not force it. We pump our legs to drive our archigher, but gravity does most of the work. We are not so muchswinging as being swung. The boat swings you. The shell wantsto move fast: Speed sings in its lines and nature. Our job issimply to work with the shell, to stop holding it back with ourthrashing struggles to go faster. Trying too hard sabotages boatspeed. Trying becomes striving and striving undoes itself Socialclimbers strive to be aristocrats but their efforts prove them nosuch thing. Aristocrats do not strive; they have already arrived.Swing is a state of arrival.The "Mind Like Water" SimileIn karate there is an image that's used to define the position ofperfect readiness: "mind like water." Imagine throwing a pebbleinto a still pond. How does the water respond? The answer is,CHAPTER 1  I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYtotally appropriately to the force and mass of theinput; then it returns to calm. It doesn't overreact orunderreact.The power in a karate punch comes from speed,not muscle; it comes from a focused "pop" at the endof the whip. That's why petite people can learn tobreak boards and bricks with their hands: it doesn'ttake calluses or brute strength, just the ability to gen-erate a focused thrust with speed. But a tense muscle is a slow one.So the high levels of training in the martial arts teach and demandbalance and relaxation as much as anything else. Clearing themind and being flexible are key.Anything that causes you to overreact or under-react can control you, and often does. Respondinginappropriately to your e-mail, your staff, your proj-ects, your unread magazines, your thoughts aboutwhat you need to do, your children, or your boss willlead to less effective results than you'd like. Mostpeople give either more or less attention to thingsthan they deserve, simply because they don't operatewith a "mind like water."Can You Get into Your "Productive State"When Required?Think about the last time you felt highly productive.You probably had a sense of being in control; youwere not stressed out; you were highly focused onwhat you were doing; time tended to disappear(lunchtime already?); and you felt you were makingnoticeable progress toward a meaningful outcome.Would you like to have more such experiences?And if you get seriously far out of thatstate—and start to feel out of control, stressedout, unfocused, bored, and stuck—do you have theability to get yourself back into it? That's where the11If your mind isempty, it is alwaysready for anything;it is open toeverything.—Sbunryu Suzuki
Anything thatcauses you tooverreact orunderreact cancontrol you, andoften does.There is one thingwe can do, and thehappiest people arethose who can doit to the limit oftheir ability. Wecan be completelypresent. We canbe all here. Wecan . . . give allour attention tothe opportunitybefore us.—MarkTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEmethodology of Getting Things Done will have the greatest impacton your life, by showing you how to get back to "mind like water,"with all your resources and faculties functioning at a maximum level.The Principle: Dealing Effectivelywith Internal CommitmentsA basic truism I have discovered over twenty years of coachingand training is that most of the stress people experience comesfrom inappropriately managed commitments they make oraccept. Even those who are not consciously "stressed out" willinvariably experience greater relaxation, better focus, andincreased productive energy when they learn more effectively tocontrol the "open loops" of their lives.You've probably made many more agreements with yourselfthan you realize, and every single one of them-big or little—isbeing tracked by a less-than-conscious part of you. These are the"incompletes," or "open loops," which I define as anything pullingat your attention that doesn't belong where it is, the way it is.Open loops can include everything from really big to-do itemslike "End world hunger" to the more modest "Hire new assistant"to the tiniest task such as "Replace electric pencil sharpener."It's likely that you also have more internal commitments cur-rently in play than you're aware of. Consider how many things youfeel even the smallest amount of responsibility tochange, finish, handle, or do something about. Youhave a commitment, for instance, to deal in someway with every new communication landing in youre-mail, on your voice-mail, and in your in-basket.And surely there are numerous projects that yousense need to be defined in your areas of responsi-bility, as well as goals and directions to be clarified, acareer to be managed, and life in general to be kept in balance.You have accepted some level of internal responsibility for every-12Anything that doesnot belong where itis, the way it is, isan "open loop"pulling on yourattention.CHAPTER 1   |  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYthing in your life and work that represents an open loop of anysort.In order to deal effectively with all of that, you must firstidentify and collect all those things that are "ringing your bell"in some way, and then plan how to handle them. That may seemlike a simple thing to do, but in practice most people don't knowhow to do it in a consistent way.The Basic Requirements for Managing CommitmentsManaging commitments well requires the implementation ofsome basic activities and behaviors:• First of all, if it's on your mind, your mind isn't clear. Anythingyou consider unfinished in any way must be captured in a trustedsystem outside your mind, or what I call a collection bucket, thatyou know you'll come back to regularly and sort through.• Second, you must clarify exactly what your commitment is anddecide what you have to do, if anything, to make progresstoward fulfilling it.• Third, once you've decided on all the actions you need to take,you must keep reminders of them organized in a system youreview regularly.An Important Exercise to Test This ModelI suggest that you write down the project or situation that is most onyour mind at this moment. What most "bugs" you, distracts you, orinterests you, or in some other way consumes a large part of yourconscious attention? It may be a project or problem that is really"in your face," something you are being pressed to handle, or asituation you feel you must deal with sooner rather than later.Maybe you have a vacation trip coming up that you need tomake some major last-minute decisions about. Or perhaps youjust inherited six million dollars and you don't know what to dowith the cash. Whatever.13THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONEGot it? Good. Now describe, in a single written sentence,your intended successful outcome for this problem or situation.In other words, what would need to happen for you to checkthis "project" off as "done"? It could be as simple as "Take theHawaii vacation," "Handle situation with customer X," "Resolvecollege situation with Susan," "Clarify new divisional manage-ment structure," or "Implement new investment strategy." Allclear? Great.Now write down the very next physical action required to movethe situation forward. If you had nothing else to do in your life butget closure on this, where would you go right now, and what visi-ble action would you take? Would you pick up a phone and makea call? Go to your computer and write an e-mail? Sit down withpen and paper and brainstorm about it? Talk face-to-face withyour spouse, your secretary, your attorney, or your boss? Buy nailsat the hardware store? What?Got the answer to that? Good.Was there any value for you in these two minutes of think-ing? If you're like the vast majority of people who complete thatdrill during my seminars, you'll be experiencing atleast a tiny bit of enhanced control, relaxation, andfocus. You'll also be feeling more motivated to actu-ally do something about that situation you've merely     been thinking about till now. Imagine that motiva-tion magnified a thousandfold, as a way to live andwork.If anything at all positive happened for you in this little exer-cise, think about this: What changed? What happened to create thatimproved condition within your own experience? The situation itselfis no further along, at least in the physical world. It's certainly notfinished yet. What probably happened is that you acquired a clearerdefinition of the outcome desired and the next action required.But what created that? The answer is, thinking. Not a lot, justenough to solidify your commitment and the resources requiredto fulfill it.14Think like a manof action, act like aman of thought.'—Henry BergsonCHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYThe Real Work of Knowledge WorkWelcome to the real-life experience of "knowledge work," and aprofound operational principle: You have to think about your stuffmore than you realize but not as much as you're afraid you might. AsPeter Drucker has written, "In knowledge work ...the task is not given; it has to be determined. 'Whatare the expected results from this work?' is . . .  thekey question in making knowledge workers produc-tive. And it is a question that demands risky deci-sions. There is usually no right answer; there arechoices instead. And results have to be clearly speci-fied, if productivity is to be achieved."Most people have a resistance to initiating the burst ofenergy that it will take to clarify the real meaning, for them, ofsomething they have let into their world, and to decide what theyneed to do about it. We're never really taught that we have tothink about our work before we can do it; much of our dailyactivity is already defined for us by the undone and unmovedthings staring at us when we come to work, or by the family to befed, the laundry to be done, or the children to be dressed at home.Thinking in a concentrated manner to define desired outcomes issomething few people feel they have to do. But in truth, outcomethinking is one of the most effective means available for makingwishes reality.Why Things Are on Your MindMost often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that youwant it to be different than it currently is, and yet:• you haven't clarified exactly what the intended outcome is;• you haven't decided what the very next physical action step is;and/or• you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the actionrequired in a system you trust.15The ancestor ofevery action is athought.—RalphWaldoTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEThat's why it's on your mind. Until those thoughts havebeen clarified and those decisions made, and the resulting datahas been stored in a system that you absolutely knowyou will think about as often as you need to, yourbrain can't give up the job. You can fool everyoneelse, but you can't fool your own mind. It knowswhether or not you've come to the conclusions youneed to, and whether you've put the resulting out-comes and action reminders in a place that can betrusted to resurface appropriately within your con-scious mind. If you haven't done those things, itwon't quit working overtime. Even if you've alreadydecided on the next step you'll take to resolve a prob-lem, your mind can't let go until and unless you write yourselfa reminder in a place it knows you will, without fail, look. Itwill keep pressuring you about that untaken next step, usuallywhen you can't do anything about it, which will just add to yourstress.
16Your Mind Doesn't Have a Mind of Its OwnAt least a portion of your mind is really kind of stupid, in an interest-ing way. If it had any innate intelligence, it would remind you of thethings you needed to do only when you could do something about them.Do you have a flashlight somewhere with dead batteries init? When does your mind tend to remind you that you need newbatteries? When you notice the dead ones! That's not very smart.If your mind had any innate intelligence, it would remind youabout those dead batteries only when you passed live ones in astore. And ones of the right size, to boot.Between the time you woke up today and now, did you thinkof anything you needed to do that you still haven't done? Haveyou had that thought more than once? Why? It's a waste of timeand energy to keep thinking about something that you make noprogress on. And it only adds to your anxieties about what youshould be doing and aren't.This constant,unproductivepreoccupation withall the things wehave to do is thesingle largestconsumer of timeand energy.—KerryCHAPTER 1  [ A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYIt seems that most people let their minds run a lot of theshow, especially where the too-much-to-do syndrome is con-cerned. You've probably given over a lot of your"stuff," a lot of your open loops, to an entity on yourinner committee that is incapable of dealing withthose things effectively the way they are—your mind.The Transformation of "Stuff"Here's how I define "stuff": anything you have allowed into yourpsychological or physical world that doesn't belong where it is, butfor which you haven't yet determined the desired outcome and thenext action step. The reason most organizing systemshaven't worked for most people is that they haven'tyet transformed all the "stuff" they're trying to orga-nize. As long as it's still "stuff," it's not controllable.Most of the to-do lists I have seen over the years(when people had them at all) were merely listings of"stuff," not inventories of the resultant real work t h a tneeded to be done. They were partial reminders of alot of things that were unresolved and as yet untranslated into out-comes and actions—that is, the real outlines and details of whatthe list-makers had to "do.""Stuff" is not inherently a bad thing. Things that commandour attention, by their very nature, usually show up as "stuff." Butonce "stuff" comes into our lives and work, we have an inherentcommitment to ourselves to define and clarify its meaning. That'sour responsibility as knowledge workers; if "stuff" were alreadytransformed and clear, our value, other than physical labor, wouldprobably not be required.At the conclusion of one of my seminars, a senior manager of amajor biotech firm looked back at the to-do lists she had come inwith and said, "Boy, that was an amorphous blob of undoability!"That's the best description I've ever heard of what passes for orga-nizing lists in most personal systems. The vast majority of peoplehave been trying to get organized by rearranging incomplete lists of17Rule your mind orit will rule you.—
We need totransform all the"stuff" we're tryingto organize intoactionable stuff weneed to do.18THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEunclear things; they haven't yet realized how much and what theyneed to organize in order to get the real payoff. They need to gathereverything that requires thinking about and then do that thinking iftheir organizational efforts are to be successful.The Process: Managing ActionYou can train yourself, almost like an athlete, to be faster, moreresponsive, more proactive, and more focused in knowledgework. You can think more effectively and manage the resultswith more ease and control. You can minimize the loose endsacross the whole spectrum of your work life and personal lifeand get a lot more done with less effort. And you can make front-end decision-making about all the "stuff" you collect and createstandard operating procedure for living and working in this newmillennium.Before you can achieve any of that, though, you'll need to getin the habit of keeping nothing on your mind. And the way to dothat, as we've seen, is not by managing time, managing informa-tion, or managing priorities. After all:• you don't manage five minutes and wind up with six;• you don't manage information overload—otherwise you'd walkinto a library and die, or the first time you connected to the Web,or even opened a phone book, you'd blow up; and• you don't manage priorities—you have them.Instead, the key to managing all of your "stuff" is managingyour actions.Managing Action Is the Prime ChallengeWhat you do with your time, what you do with information,and what you do with your body and your focus relative to yourCHAPTER 1  I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITYpriorities—those are the real options to which you must allocateyour limited resources. The real issue is how to make appropriatechoices about what to do at any point in time. The real issue ishow we manage actions.That may sound obvious. However, it might amaze you todiscover how many next actions for how many projects and com-mitments remain undetermined by most people. It'sextremely difficult to manage actions you haven'tidentified or decided on. Most people have dozens ofthings that they need to do to make progress onmany fronts, but they don't yet know what they are.And the common complaint that "I don't have timeto ____ " (fill in the blank) is understandable because many pro-jects seem overwhelming—and are overwhelming because youcan't do a project at all! You can only do an action related to it.Many actions require only a minute or two, in the appropriatecontext, to move a project forward.In training and coaching thousands of professionals, I havefound that lack of time is not the major issue for them (thoughthey themselves may think it is); the real problem is alack of clarity and definition about what a projectreally is, and what the associated next-action stepsrequired are. Clarifying things on the front end,when they first appear on the radar, rather than onthe back end, after trouble has developed, allowspeople to reap the benefits of managing action.The Value of a Bottom-Up ApproachI have discovered over the years the practical value of working onpersonal productivity improvement from the bottom up, startingwith the most mundane, ground-floor level of current activity andcommitments. Intellectually, the most appropriate way ought to beto work from the top down, first uncovering personal and corpo-rate missions, then defining critical objectives, and finally focus-ing on the details of implementation. The trouble is, however,19The beginningis half of everyaction.—Greek
Things rarely getstuck because oflack of time. They getstuck because thedoing of them hasnot been defined.THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEthat most people are so embroiled in commitments on a day-to-day level that their ability to focus successfully on the larger hori-zon is seriously impaired. Consequently, a bottom-up approach isusually more effective.Getting current on and in control of what's in your in-basketand on your mind right now, and incorporating practices that canhelp you stay that way, will provide the best means of broadeningyour horizons. A creative, buoyant energy will be unleashed thatwill better support your focus on new heights, and your confidencewill increase to handle what that creativity produces. An immedi-ate sense of freedom, release, and inspiration naturally comes topeople who roll up their sleeves and implement this process.You'll be better equipped to undertake higher-focusedthinking when your tools for handling the resulting actionsfor implementation are part of your ongoing operational style.There are more meaningful things to think about than your in-basket, but if your management of that level is not a sefficient as it could be, it's like trying to swim inbaggy clothing.Many executives I have worked with during theday to clear the decks of their mundane "stuff" havespent the following evening having a stream of ideasand visions about their company and their future.This happens as an automatic consequence ofunsticking their workflow.Horizontal and Vertical Action ManagementYou need to control commitments, projects, and actions in twoways—horizontally and vertically. "Horizontal" controlmaintainscoherence across all the activities in which you are involved.Imagine your psyche constantly scanning your environment likepolice radar; it may land on any of a thousand different items thatinvite or demand your attention during any twenty-four-hourperiod: the drugstore, the housekeeper, your aunt Martha, thestrategic plan, lunch, a wilting plant in the office, an upset cus-20Vision is notenough; it must becombined withventure. It is notenough to stare upthe steps; we muststep up the stairs.—Vaclav HavelCHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITYtomer, shoes that need shining. You have to buy stamps, depositthat check, make the hotel reservation, cancel a staff meeting, seea movie tonight. You might be surprised at the volume of thingsyou actually think about and have to deal with just in one day. Youneed a good system that can keep track of as many of them as pos-sible, supply required information about them on demand, andallow you to shift your focus from one thing to the next quicklyand easily."Vertical" control, in contrast, manages thinking up anddown the track of individual topics and projects. For example,your inner "police radar" lands on your next vacation as you andyour spouse talk about it over dinner—where and when you'll go,what you'll do, how to prepare for the trip, and so on. Or you andyour boss need to make some decisions about the new d e p a r t -mental reorganization you're about to launch. Or you just need toget your thinking up to date on the customer you're about to call.This is "project planning" in the broad sense. It's focusing in on asingle endeavor, situation, or person and fleshing out whateverideas, details, priorities, and sequences of events may be requiredfor you to handle it, at least for the moment.The goal for managing horizontally and vertically is thesame: to get things off your mind and get things done. Appropri-ate action management lets you feel comfortable and in control asyou move through your broad spectrum of work and life, whileappropriate project focusing gets you clear about and on trackwith the specifics needed.The Major Change: Getting It All Out of Your HeadThere is no real way to achieve the kind of relaxedcontrol I'm promising if you keep things only in yourhead. As you'll discover, the individual behaviorsdescribed in this book are things you're alreadydoing. The big difference between what I do andwhat others do is that I capture and organize 100percent of my "stuff" in and with objective tools atThere is usually aninverse proportionbetween how muchsomething is onyour mind and howmuch it's gettingdone.21THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEhand, not in my mind. And that applies to everything—little or big,personal or professional, urgent or not. Everything.I'm sure that at some time or other you've gotten to a place ina project, or in your life, where you just had to sit down and make alist. If so, you have a reference point for what I'm talking about.Most people, however, do that kind of list-making drill only whenthe confusion gets too unbearable and they just have to do some-thing about it. They usually make a list only about the specificarea that's bugging them. But if you made that kind of review acharacteristic of your ongoing life- and work style, and you main-tained it across all areas of your life (not just the most "urgent"),you'd be practicing the kind of "black belt" management style I'mdescribing.I try to make intuitive choices based on myoptions, instead of trying to think about what thoseoptions are. I need to have thought about all of thatalready and captured the results in a trusted way. Idon't want to waste time thinking about things morethan once. That's an inefficient use of creative energyand a source of frustration and stress.And you can't fudge this thinking. Your mind will keepworking on anything that's still in that undecided state. Butthere's a limit to how much unresolved "stuff" it can containbefore it blows a fuse.The short-term-memory part of your mind—the part thattends to hold all of the incomplete, undecided, and unor ganize d"stuff"—functions much like RAM on a personal computer. Yourconscious mind, like the computer screen, is a focusing tool, not astorage place. You can think about only two or three things at once.But the incomplete items are still being stored in the short-term-memory space. And as with RAM, there's limited capacity; there'sonly so much "stuff" you can store in there and still have that part ofyour brain function at a high level. Most people walk around withtheir RAM bursting at the seams. They're constantly distracted,their focus disturbed by their own internal mental overload.22There is no reasonever to have thesame thought twice,unless you likehaving that thought.CHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITYFor example, in the last few minutes, has your mind wan-dered off into some area that doesn't have anything to do withwhat you're reading here? Probably. And most likely where yourmind went was to some open loop, some incomplete situationthat you have some investment in. All that situation did was rearup out of the RAM part of your brain and yell at you, internally.And what did you do about it? Unless you wrote it down and putit in a trusted "bucket" that you know you'll review appropriatelysometime soon, more than likely you worried about it. Not themost effective behavior: no progress was made, andtension was increased.The big problem is that your mind keepsreminding you of things when you can't do anythingabout them. It has no sense of past or future. Thatmeans that as soon as you tell yourself that you needto do something, and store it in your RAM, there's apart of you that thinks you should be doing that something all thetime. Everything you've told yourself you ought to do, it thinksyou should be doing right now. Frankly, as soon as you have twothings to do stored in your RAM, you've generated personalfailure, because you can't do them both at the same time. Thisproduces an all-pervasive stress factor whose source can't be pin-pointed.Most people have been in some version of this mental stressstate so consistently, for so long, that they don't even know they'rein it. Like gravity, it's ever-present—so much so that those whoexperience it usually aren't even aware of the pressure. The onlytime most of them will realize how much tension they've beenunder is when they get rid of it and notice how different they feel.Can you get rid of that kind of stress? You bet. The rest ofthis book will explain how.
23It is hard to fightan enemy who hasoutposts in yourhead.—Sally KemptonGetting Control ofYour Life: The Five Stages ofMastering WorkflowTHE CORE PROCESS I teach for mastering the art of relaxed and con-trolled knowledge work is a five-stage method for managingworkflow. No matter what the setting, there are five discretestages that we go through as we deal with our work. We (1) collectthings that command our attention; (2) process what they meanand what to do about them; and (3) organize the results, which we(4) review as options for what we choose to (5) do.This constitutes the management of the "horizontal"aspect of our lives—incorporating everything thathas our attention at any time.The method is straightforward enough in princi-ple, and it is generally how we all go about our work inany case, but in my experience most people can standsignificantly to improve their handling of each one o fthe five stages. The quality of our workflow manage-ment is only as good as the weakest link in this five-phase chain, so all the links must be integratedtogether and supported with consistent standards.Most people have major leaks in their collectionprocess. Many have collected things but haven'tprocessed or decided what action to take about them. Others makegood decisions about "stuff" in the moment but lose the value ofthat thinking because they don't efficiently organize the results. Stillothers have good systems but don't review them consistentlyenough to keep them functional. Finally, if any one of these links is24
The knowledgethat we considerknowledge provesitself in action.What we nowmean byknowledge isinformation inaction,informationfocused on results.—Peter F. DruckerCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWweak, what someone is likely to choose to do at any point in timemay not be the best option.The dynamics of these five stages need to be understood, andgood techniques and tools implemented to facilitate their func-tioning at an optimal level. I have found it very helpful, if notessential, to separate these stages as I move through my day. Thereare times when I want only to collect input and not decide what todo with it yet. At other times I may just want to process my notesfrom a meeting. Or I may have just returned from a big trip andneed to distribute and organize what I collected and processed onthe road. Then there are times when I want to review the wholeinventory of my work, or some portion of it. And obviously a lotof my time is spent merely doing something that I need to getdone.I have discovered that one of the major reasons many peoplehaven't had a lot of success with "getting organized" is simply thatthey have tried to do all five phases at one time. Most, when theysit down to "make a list," are trying to collect the "most importantthings" in some order that reflects priorities and sequences, with-out setting out many (or any) real actions to take. But if you don'tdecide what needs to be done about your secretary's b i r t h d a y ,because it's "not that important" right now, that open loop willtake up energy and prevent you from having a totally effective,clear focus on what is important.This chapter explains the five phases in detail. Chapters 4through 8 provide a step-by-step program for implementing anairtight system for each phase, with lots of examples and bestpractices.CollectIt's important to know what needs to be collected and how to col-lect it most effectively so you can process it appropriately. In orderfor your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on2526THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEto everything, you have to know that you have truly c a p t u r e deverything that might represent something you have to do, andthat at some point in the near future you will process and reviewall of it.Gathering 100 Percent of the "Incompletes"In order to eliminate "holes in the bucket," you need to collect andgather together placeholders for or representations o f  a l l  t h ethings you consider incomplete in your world—that is, anythingpersonal or professional, big or little, of urgent or minor impor-tance, that you think ought to be different than it currently is andthat you have any level of internal commitment to changing.Many of the things you have to do are being collected for youas you read this. Mail is coming into your mailbox, m em os arebeing routed to your in-basket, e-mail is being funneled into yourcomputer, and messages are accumulating on your voice-mail. Butat the same time, you've been "collecting" things in your environ-ment and in your psyche that don't belong where they are, the waythey are, for all eternity. Even though it may not be as obviously"in your face" as your e-mail, this "stuff" still requires some kindof resolution—a loop to be closed, something to be done. Strategyideas loitering on a legal pad in a stack on your credenza, "dead"gadgets in your desk drawers that need to be fixed or thrown away,and out-of-date magazines on your coffee table all fall into thiscategory of "stuff."As soon as you attach a "should," "need to," or "ought to" toan item, it becomes an incomplete. Decisions you still need tomake about whether or not you are going to do something, forexample, are already incompletes. This includes all of your "I'mgoing to"s, where you've decided to do something but haven'tstarted moving on it yet. And it certainly includes all pending andin-progress items, as well as those things on which you've doneeverything you're ever going to do except acknowledge that you'refinished with them.In order to manage this inventory of open loops appropri-CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWately, you need to capture it into "containers" that hold items inabeyance until you have a few moments to decide what they areand what, if anything, you're going to do about them. Then youmust empty these containers regularly to ensure that they remainviable collection tools.Basically, everything is already being collected, in the largersense. If it's not being directly managed in a trusted external sys-tem of yours, then it's resident somewhere in your psyche. The factthat you haven't put an item in your in-basket doesn't mean youhaven't got it. But we're talking here about making sure that every-thing you need is collected somewhere other than in your head.The Collection ToolsThere are several types of tools, both low- and high-tech, that canbe used to collect your incompletes. The following can all serve asversions of an in-basket, capturing self-generated input as well asinformation coming from outside:• Physical in-basket• Paper-based note-taking devices• Electronic note-taking devices• Voice-recording devices• E-mailThe Physical In-BasketThe standard plastic, wood, leather, or wire tray is the most com-mon tool for collecting paper-based materials and anything elsephysical that needs some sort of processing: mail, magazines,memos, notes, phone slips, receipts—even flashlights with deadbatteries.Writing Paper and PadsLoose-leaf notebooks, spiral binders, and steno and legal pads allwork fine for collecting random ideas, input, things to do, and soon. Whatever kind fits your taste and needs is fine.2728THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEElectronic Note-TakingComputers can be used to type in notes for processing later. Andas character-recognition technology advances, a parade of digitaltools designed to capture data continues to be introduced. Hand-held devices (personal digital assistants, or PDAs) and electroniclegal pads can both be used to collect all kinds of input.Auditory CaptureAvailable auditory devices include answering machines, voice-mail, and dictating equipment, such as digital or microcassetterecorders. All of these can be useful for preserving an interimrecord of things you need to remember or deal with.E-mailIf you're wired to the rest of the world through e-mail, yoursoftware contains some sort of holding area for incoming mes-sages and files, where they can be stored until they are viewed,read, and processed. Pagers and telephones can capture this kindof input as well.Higher-Tech DevicesNow you can dictate into computers as well as hand-write intothem. As more and more communication is morphed into digitaland wireless formats, it will become easier to capture ideas (with acorresponding increase in the amount of data reaching us that weneed to manage!)."Computer!""Yes, David?""I need bread.""Yes, David."My needed grocery item has been collected. And as the orga-nizing part of the action-management process is further digitized,"bread" will automatically be added to my electronic grocery list,and maybe even ordered and delivered.CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWWhether high-tech or low-tech, all of the tools described aboveserve as similar in-baskets, capturing potentially useful informa-tion, commitments, and agreements for action. You're probablyalready using some version of most of them.The Collection Success FactorsUnfortunately, merely having an in-basket doesn't make it func-tional. Most people do have collection devices of some sort, butusually they're more or less out of control. Let's examine the threerequirements to make the collection phase work:1|    E v e r y  o p e n  l o o p  m u s t  b e  i n  y o u r  c o l l e c t i o n  s y stem and outof your head.2 |   You must have as few collection buckets as you can get by with.3 |   You must empty them regularly.Get It All Out of Your HeadIf you're still trying to keep track of too many things in your RAM,you likely won't be motivated to use and empty your in-basketswith integrity. Most people are relatively careless about these toolsbecause they know they don't represent discrete, whole systemsanyway: there's an incomplete set of things in their in-basket andan incomplete set in their mind, and they're not getting any payofffrom either one, so their thinking goes. It's like trying to play pin-ball on a machine that has big holes in the table, so the balls keepfalling out: there's little motivation to keep playing the game.These collection tools should become part of your life-style.Keep them close by so no matter where you are you can collect apotentially valuable thought-—think of them as being as indis-pensable as your toothbrush or your driver's license or your glasses.Minimize the Number of Collection BucketsYou should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as youcan get by with. You need this function to be available to you in29THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEevery context, since things you'll want to capture may show upalmost anywhere. If you have too many collection zones, however,you won't be able to process them easily or consistently.An excess of collection buckets is seldom a problem on thehigh-tech end; the real improvement opportunity for most peopleis on the low-tech side, primarily in the areas of note-taking andphysical in-basket collection. Written notes need to be corralledand processed instead of left lying embedded in stacks, note-books, and drawers. Paper materials need to be funneled intophysical in-baskets instead of being scattered over myriad piles inall the available corners of your world.Implementing   standard   tools   for   capturingideas and input will become more and more criticalas your life and work become more sophisticated. Asyou proceed in your career, for instance, you'll proba-bly notice that your best ideas about work will notcome to you at work. The ability to leverage thatthinking with good collection devices that hand is key to increased productivity.
30Empty the Buckets RegularlyThe final success factor for collecting should be obvious: if youdon't empty and process the "stuff" you've collected, your bucketsaren't serving any function other than the storage of amorphousmaterial. Emptying the bucket does not mean that you have tofinish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it just meansyou have to take it out of the container, decide what it is and whatshould be done with it, and, if it's still unfinished, organize it intoyour system. You don't put it back into "in"! Not emptying yourin-basket is like having garbage cans that nobody ever dumps—you just have to keep buying new ones to hold all your trash.In order for you to get "in" to empty, your total action-management system must be in place. Too much "stuff" is leftpiled in in-baskets because of a lack of effective systems "down-stream" from there. It often seems easier to leave things in "in"Men of lofty genius•when they aredoing the least•work are the mostactive.—LeonarCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWwhen you know you have to do something about them but can'tdo it right then. The in-basket, especially for paper and e-mail, isthe best that many people can do in terms of organization—atleast they know that somewhere in there is a reminder of some-thing they still have to do. Unfortunately, that safety net is lostwhen the piles get out of control or the inventory of e-mails getstoo extensive to be viewed on one screen.When you master the next phase and know how to processyour incompletes easily and rapidly, "in" can return to its originalfunction. Let's move on to how to get those in-baskets and e-mailsystems empty without necessarily having to do the work now.ProcessTeaching them the item-by-item thinking required to get theircollection buckets empty is perhaps the most critical improve-ment I have made for virtually all the people I've worked with.When the head of a major department in a global corporation hadfinished processing all her open items with me, she sat back inawe and told me that though she had been able to relax aboutwhat meetings to go to thanks to her trust in her calendar, she hadnever felt that same relief about all the many other aspects of herjob, which we had just clarified together. The actions and infor-mation she needed to be reminded of were now identified andentrusted to a concrete system.What do you need to ask yourself (and answer) about eache-mail, voice-mail, memo, or self-generated idea that comes yourway? This is the component of action management that forms thebasis for your personal organization. Many people try to "getorganized" but make the mistake of doing it with incompletebatches of "stuff." You can't organize what's incoming—you canonly collect it and process it. Instead, you organize the actionsyou'll need to take based on the decisions you've made aboutwhat needs to be done. The whole deal—both the processingand3132THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWorganizing phases—is captured in the center "trunk" of thedecision-tree model shown here.In later chapters, I'll coach you in significant detail througheach element of the process. For now, though, I suggest you selecta to-do list or a pile of papers from your in-basket and assess a fewitems as we take an overview.What Is It?This is not a dumb question. We've talked about "stuff." And we'vetalked about collection buckets. But we haven't discussed whatstuff is and what to do about it. For example, many of the itemsthat tend to leak out of our personal organizing systems are amor-phous forms that we receive from the government or from ourcompany—do we actually need to do something about them? Andwhat about that e-mail from human resources, letting us knowthat blah-blah about the blah-blah is now the policy of blah-blah?I've unearthed piles of messages in stacks and desk drawers thatwere tossed there because the client didn't take just a few secondsto figure out what in fact the communication or document wasreally about. Which is why the next decision is critical.Is It Actionable?There are two possible answers for this: YES and NO.No Action Required If the answer is NO, there are three possibili-ties:1   |   It's trash, no longer needed.2   |   No action is needed now, but something might need to bedone later (incubate).3  |   The item is potentially useful information that might beneeded for something later (reference).These three categories can themselves be managed; we'll getinto that in a later chapter. For now, suffice it to say that you need33THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEa trash basket and <Del> key for trash, a "tickler" file or calendarfor material that's incubating, and a good filing system for refer-ence information.Actionable This is the YES group of items, stuff about whichsomething needs to be done. Typical examples range froman e-mail requesting your participation in a corporate serviceproject on such-and-such a date to the notes in your in-basketfrom your face-to-face meeting with the group vice presidentabout a significant new project that involves hiring an outsideconsultant.Two things need to be determined about each actionable item:1 |   What "project" or outcome have you committed to? and2 |   What's the next action required?If It's About a Project. . . You need to capture that outcome on a"Projects" list. That will be the stake in the ground that remindsyou that you have an open loop. A Weekly Review of the list (seepage 46) will bring this item back to you as something that's stilloutstanding. It will stay fresh and alive in your management sys-tem until it is completed or eliminated.What's the Next Action? This is the critical questionfor anything you've collected; if you answer it appro-priately, you'll have the key substantive thing to orga-nize. The "next action" is the next physical, visibleactivity that needs to be engaged in, in order to movethe current reality toward completion.Some examples of next actions might be:
34• Call Fred re tel. # for the garage he recommended.• Draft thoughts for the budget-meeting agenda.• Talk to Angela about the filing system we need to set up.• Research database-management software on the Web.It does not takemuch strength todo things, but itrequires a greatdeal of strength todecide what to do.—ElbertCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWThese are all real physical activities that need to h a p p e n .Reminders of these will become the primary grist for the mill ofyour personal productivity-management system.Do It, Delegate It, or Defer It    Once you've decided on the nextaction, you have three options:1|    Do it. If an action will take less than two minutes, it shouldbe done at the moment it is defined.2|    Delegate it. If the action will take longer than two minutes,ask yourself, Am I the right person to do this? If the answeris no, delegate it to the appropriate entity.3|    Defer it. If the action will take longer than two minutes, andyou are the right person to do it, you will have to defer actingon it until later and track it on one or more "Next Actions"lists.OrganizeThe outer ring of the workflow diagram shows the eight discretecategories of reminders and materials that will result from yourprocessing all your "stuff." Together they make up a total systemfor organizing just about everything that's on your plate, or couldbe added to it, on a daily and weekly basis.For nonactionable items, the possible categories are trash,incubation tools, and reference storage. If no action is needed onsomething, you toss it, "tickle" it for later reassessment, or file it soyou can find the material if you need to refer to it at another time.To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storageor files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders ofnext actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for.All of the organizational categories need to be physicallycontained in some form. When I refer to "lists," I just meansome sort of reviewable set of reminders, which could be lists on3536THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWnotebook paper or in some computer program or even file foldersholding separate pieces of paper for each item. For instance, thelist of current projects could be kept on a page in a Day Runner; itcould be a "To Do" category on a PDA; or it could be in a filelabeled "Projects List." Incubating reminders (such a s  " a f t e rMarch 1 contact my accountant to set up a meeting") may bestored in a paper-based "tickler" file or in a paper- or computer-based calendar program.ProjectsI define a project as any desired result that requires more than oneaction step. This means that some rather small things that youmight not normally call projects are going to be on your "Projects"list. The reasoning behind my definition is that if one step won'tcomplete something, some kind of stake needs to be placed in theground to remind you that there's something still left to do. Ifyou don't have a placeholder to remind you about it, it will slipback into RAM. Another way to think of this is as a list of openloops.A Partial "Projects"ListGet new staff person on board R&D joint-venture video projectAugust vacation Produce new training compact diskStaff off-site retreat Establish next year's seminar schedulePublish book Orchestrate a one-hour keynoteFinalize computer upgrades      . presentationUpdate will Get proficient with videoconferencingFinalize budgets accessFinalize new product line Finalize employment agreementsGet comfortable with new contact- Install new backyard lightsmanagement software Establish formal relationships with SouthGet reprints of Fortune article American repGet a publicist Finalize staff policies and proceduresFinish new orchard planting Get a new living-room chair3738THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEProjects do not need to be listed in any particular o r d e r ,whether by size or by priority. They just need to be on a master listso you can review them regularly enough to ensure that appropri-ate next actions have been defined for each of them.You don't actually do a project; you can only do action stepsrelated to it. When enough of the right action steps have beentaken, some situation will have been created that matches yourinitial picture of the outcome closely enough that you can callit "done." The list of projects is the compilation of finish lineswe put before us, to keep our next actions moving on all tracksappropriately.Project Support MaterialFor many of your projects, you will accumulate relevant informa-tion that you will want to organize by theme or topic or projectname. Your "Projects" list will be merely an index. A l l of  t hedetails, plans, and supporting information that you may need asyou work on your various projects should be contained in separatefile folders, computer files, notebooks, or binders.Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organizedyour project support material by theme or topic, you will probablyfind that it is almost identical to your reference material and couldbe kept in the same reference file system (a "Wedding" filecould be kept in the general-reference files, for instance). Theonly difference is that in the case of active projects, support mate-rial may need to be reviewed on a more consistent basis to ensurethat all the necessary action steps are identified.I usually recommend that people store their support materi-als out of sight. If you have a good working reference file systemclose enough at hand, you may find that that's the simplest way toorganize them. There will be times, though, when it'll be moreconvenient to have the materials out and instantly in view andavailable, especially if you're working on a hot project that youneed to check references for several times during the day. FileCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWfolders in wire standing holders or in stackable trays within easyreach can be practical for this kind of "pending" paperwork.The Next-Action CategoriesAs the Workflow Diagram makes clear, the next-action decisionis central. That action needs to be the next physical, visible behav-ior, without exception, on every open loop.Any less-than-two-minute actions that you perform, and allother actions that have already been completed, do not, of course,need to be tracked; they're done. What does need to be tracked isevery action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specificday (enter these in your calendar); those that need to be done assoon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and allthose that you are waiting for others to do (put these on a "Wait-ing For" list).CalendarReminders of actions you need to take fall into two categories:those about things that have to happen on a specific day or time,and those about things that just need to get done as soon as possi-ble. Your calendar handles the first type of reminder.Three things go on your calendar:• time-specific actions;• day-specific actions; and• day-specific information.Time-Specific Actions This is a fancy name for appointments.Often the next action to be taken on a project is attending a meet-ing that has been set up to discuss it. Simply tracking that on thecalendar is sufficient.Day-Specific Actions These are things that you need to do some-time on a certain day, but not necessarily at a specific time. Perhapsyou told Mioko you would call her on Friday to check that the39THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEreport you're sending her is OK. She won't have the report untilThursday, and she's leaving the country on Saturday, so Friday isthe time window for taking the action—but anytime Friday willbe fine. That should be tracked on the calendar for Friday but nottied to any particular time slot—it should just go on the day.It'suseful to have a calendar on which you can note both time-specific and day-specific actions.Day-Specific Information The calendar is also the place to keeptrack of things you want to know about on specific days—not nec-essarily actions you'll have to take but rather information that maybe useful on a certain date. This might include directions forappointments, activities that other people (family or staff) will beinvolved in then, or events of interest. It's also helpful to putshort-term "tickler" information here, too, such as a reminder tocall someone after the day they return from a vacation.No More "Daily To-Do" Lists   Those three things are what go onthe calendar, and nothing else! I know this is heresy to traditionaltime-management training, which has almost uni-versally taught that the "daily to-do list" is key. Butsuch lists don't work, for two reasons.First, constant new input and shifting tacticalpriorities reconfigure daily work so consistently thatit's virtually impossible to nail down to-do itemsahead of time. Having a working game plan as a ref-erence point is always useful, but it must be able to berenegotiated at any moment. Trying to keep a list in writing onthe calendar, which must then be rewritten on another day ifitems don't get done, is demoralizing and a waste of time. The"Next Actions" lists I advocate will hold all of those actionreminders, even the most time-sensitive ones. And they won'thave to be rewritten daily.Second, if there's something on a daily to-do list that doesn'tabsolutely have to get done that day, it will dilute the emphasis on40Blessed are theflexible, for theyshall not be bentout of shape.—MichaelCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWthe things that truly do. If I have to call Mioko on Friday becausethat's the only day I can reach her, but then I add five other, lessimportant or less time-sensitive calls to my to-do list, when theday gets crazy I may never call Mioko. My brain will have to takeback the reminder that that's the one phone call I won't getanother chance at. That's not utilizing the system appropriately.The way I look at it, the calendar should be sacred territory. If youwrite something there, it must get done that day or not at all. Theonly rewriting should be for changed appointments.The "Next Actions" List(s)So where do all your action reminders go? On "Next Actions"lists, which, along with the calendar, are at the heart of dailyaction-management organization.Any longer-than-two-minute, nondelegatable action youhave identified needs to be tracked somewhere. "Call Jim Smithre budget meeting," "Phone Rachel and Laura's moms aboutsleepaway camp," and "Draft ideas re the annual sales conference"are all the kinds of action reminders that need to be kept in appro-priate lists, or buckets, to be assessed as options for what we willdo at any point in time.If you have only twenty or thirty of these, it may be fine tokeep them all on one list labeled "Next Actions," which you'llreview whenever you have any free time. For most ofus, however, the number is more likely to be fifty to150. In that case it makes sense to subdivide your"Next Actions" list into categories, such as "Calls" tomake when you're at a phone or "Project Head Ques-tions" to be asked at your weekly briefing.Nonactionable ItemsYou need well-organized, discrete systems to handle the itemsthat require no action as well as the ones that do. No-action sys-tems fall into three categories: trash, incubation, and reference.41Everything shouldbe made as simpleas possible, but notsimpler.—Albert Einstein42THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONETrashTrash should be self-evident. Throw away anything that has nopotential future action or reference value. If you leave this stuffmixed in with other categories, it will seriously undermine thesystem.IncubationThere are two other groups of things besides trash that require noimmediate action, but this stuff you will want to keep. Here again,it's critical that you separate nonactionable from actionable items;otherwise you will tend to go numb to your piles, stacks, and listsand not know where to start or what needs to be done.Say you pick up something from a memo, or read an e-mail,that gives you an idea for a project you might want to do someday,but not now. You'll want to be reminded of it again later so youcan reassess the option of doing something about it in the future.For example, a brochure arrives in the mail for the upcoming sea-son of your local symphony. On a quick browse, you see that theprogram that really interests you is still four months away—toodistant for you to move on it yet (you're not sure what your travelschedule will be that far out), but if you are in town, you'd like togo. What should you do about that?There are two kinds of "incubate" systems that could workfor this kind of thing: "Someday/Maybe" lists and a "tickler" file."Someday/Maybe" It can be useful and inspiring to maintain anongoing list of things you might want to do at some point but notnow. This is the "parking lot" for projects that would be impossi-ble to move on at present but that you don't want to forget aboutentirely. You'd like to be reminded of the possibility at regularintervals.CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWTypical Partial "Someday/Maybe" ListGet a bass-fishing boat Create promotional videos of staffLearn Spanish Find Stafford LyonsTake a watercolor class Get a digital video camera *Get a sideboard for the kitchen Northern Italy tripBuild a lap pool Apprentice with my carpenterGet Kathryn a scooter Spotlight our artworkTake a balloon ride Build a koi pondBuild a wine cellar Digitize old photos and videosTake a trip through Montana Have a neighborhood partyLearn Photoshop software capabilities Set up remote-server access at homeSet up a not-for-profit foundationYou'll probably have some subcategories in your master"Someday/Maybe" list, such as• CDs I might want• Videos to rent• Books to read• Wine to taste• Weekend trips to take• Things to do with the kids• Seminars to takeYou must review this list periodically if you're going to getthe most value from it. I suggest you include a scan of the con-tents in your Weekly Review (see page 46)."Tickler" File The most elegant version of holding for review isthe "tickler" file, sometimes also referred to as a "suspended" or"follow-on" file. This is a system that allows you to almost literallymail something to yourself, for receipt on some designated day inthe future.Your calendar can serve the same function. You mightremind yourself on your calendar for March 15, for example, that4344THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEyour taxes are due in a month; or for September 12, that SwanLake will be presented by the Bolshoi at the Civic Auditorium insix weeks.For further details, refer to chapter 7.Reference MaterialMany things that come your way require no action but haveintrinsic value as information. You will want to keep and be ableto retrieve these as needed. They can be stored in paper-based ordigital form.Paper-based material—anything from the menu for a localtake-out deli to the plans, drawings, and vendor information for alandscape project—is best stored in efficient physical-retrievalsystems. These can range from pages in a loose-leaf planner ornotebook, for a list of favorite restaurants or the phone numbersof the members of a school committee, to whole file c a b i n e t sdedicated to the due-diligence paperwork for a corporate merger.Electronic storage can include everything from networkeddatabase information to ad hoc reference and archive folderslocated in your communication software.The most important thing to remember here is that refer-ence should be exactly that—information that can be easilyreferred to when required. Reference systems generally taketwo forms: (1) topic- and area-specific storage, and (2) general-reference files. The first types usually define themselves in termsof how they are stored—for example, a file drawer dedicated tocontracts, by date; a drawer containing only confidentialemployee-compensation information; or a series of cabinets forclosed legal cases that might need to be consulted during futuretrials.General-Reference Filing The second type of reference system isone that everyone needs close at hand for storing ad hoc informa-tion that doesn't belong in some predesignated category. You needsomewhere to keep the instruction manual for your cell phone,CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWthe notes from the meeting about the Smith project, and thosefew yen that you didn't get to change at the end of your last trip toTokyo (and that you'll use when you go back there).The lack of a good general-reference file can be one of thebiggest bottlenecks in implementing an efficient personal action-management system. If filing isn't easy and fast (and even fun!),you'll tend to stack things instead of filing them. If your referencematerial doesn't have a nice clean edge to it, the line betweenactionable and nonactionable items will blur, visually and psycho-logically, and your mind will go numb to the whole business.Establishing a good working system for this category of materialis critical to ensuring stress-free productivity; we will explore it indetail in chapter 7.ReviewIt's one thing to write down that you need milk; it's another to beat the store and remember it. Likewise, writing down that youneed to call a friend for the name of an estate attorney is differentfrom remembering it when you're at a phone and have some dis-cretionary time.You need to be able to review the whole picture of your lifeand work at appropriate intervals and appropriate levels. For mostpeople the magic of workflow management is realized in the con-sistent use of the review phase. This is where you take a look atall your outstanding projects and open loops, at what I call the10,000-foot level (see page 51), on a weekly basis. It's your chanceto scan all the defined actions and options before you, thus radi-cally increasing the efficacy of the choices you make about whatyou're doing at any point in time.What to Review WhenIf you set up a personal organization system structured as I rec-ommend, with a "Projects" list, a calendar, "Next Actions" lists,45THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEand a "Waiting For" list, not much will be required to maintainthat system.The item you'll probably review most frequently is yourcalendar, which will remind you about the "hard landscape" forthe day—that is, what things will die if you don't do them. Thisdoesn't mean that the things written on there are the most"important" in some grand sense—only that they have to getdone. At at any point in time, knowing what has to get done, andwhen, creates a terrain for maneuvering. It's a good habit, as soonas you conclude an action on your calendar (a meeting, a phonecall, the final draft of a report), to check and see what else remainsto be done.After checking your calendar, you'll most oftenturn to your "Next Actions" lists. These hold theinventory of predefined actions that you can take ifyou have any discretionary time during the day. Ifyou've organized them by context ("At Home," "AtComputer," "In Meeting with George"), they'll comeinto play only when those contexts are available."Projects," "Waiting For," and "Someday/Maybe" lists needto be reviewed only as often as you think they have to be in orderto stop you from wondering about them.Critical Success Factor: The Weekly ReviewEverything that might potentially require action must bereviewed on a frequent enough basis to keep your mind from tak-ing back the job of remembering and reminding. In order to trustthe rapid and intuitive judgment calls that you make aboutactions from moment to moment, you must consistently retrenchat some more elevated level. In my experience (with thousands ofpeople), that translates into a behavior critical for success: theWeekly Review.All of your open loops (i.e., projects), active project plans,and "Next Actions," "Agendas," "Waiting For," and even "Someday/Maybe" lists should be reviewed once a week. This also gives you46Review your lists asoften as you needto, to get them offyour mind.CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWan opportunity to ensure that your brain is clear andthat all the loose strands of the past few days havebeen collected, processed, and organized.If you're like most people, you've found thatthings can get relatively out of control during thecourse of a few days of operational intensity. That'sto be expected. You wouldn't want to distract yourselffrom too much of the work at hand in an effort tostay totally "squeaky clean" all the time. But in orderto afford the luxury of "getting on a roll" with confi-dence, you'll probably need to clean house oncea week.The Weekly Review is the time to• Gather and process all your "stuff."• Review your system.• Update your lists.• Get clean, clear, current, and complete.The affairs of lifeembrace amultitude ofinterests, and hewho reasons in anyone of them,without consultingthe rest, is avisionary unsuitedto control thebusiness of theworld.—-JamesFenimoreCooperMost people don't have a really complete system, and they getno real payoff from reviewing things for just that reason: theiroverview isn't total. They still have a vague sense that somethingmay be missing. That's why the rewards to be gained from imple-menting this whole process are at least geometric: themore complete the system is, the more you'll trust it.And the more you trust it, the more complete you'llbe motivated to keep it. The Weekly Review is a mas-ter key to maintaining that standard.Most people feel best about their work the weekbefore their vacation, but it's not because of the vaca-tion itself. What do you do the last week before youleave on a big trip? You clean up, close up, clarify, andrenegotiate all your agreements with yourself andothers. I just suggest that you do this weekly insteadof yearly.47Most people feelbest about theirwork when they'vecleaned up, closedup, clarified, andrenegotiated alltheir agreementswith themselvesand others. Do thisweekly instead ofyearly.THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEDoThe basic purpose of this workflow-management process is tofacilitate good choices about what you're doing at anypoint in time. At 10:33 A.M. Monday, decidingwhether to call Sandy, finish the proposal, or processyour e-mails will always be an intuitive call, but withthe proper preplanning you can feel much more con-fident about your choices. You can move from hope totrust in your actions, immediately increasing yourspeed and effectiveness.Three Models for Making Action ChoicesLet's assume for a moment that you're not resisting any of your"stuff" out of insecurity or procrastination. There will always be alarge list of actions that you are not doing at any given moment.So how will you decide what to do and what not to do, and feelgood about both?The answer is, by trusting your intuition. If you have col-lected, processed, organized, and reviewed all your current commit-ments, you can galvanize your intuitive judgment with someintelligent and practical thinking aboutyour workand values.I have developed three models that will be help-ful for you to incorporate in your decision-makingabout what to do. They won't tell you answers—whether you  call  Frederick,  e-mail your  son  atschool, or just go have an informal "how are you?"conversation with your secretary—but they will assistyou in framing your options more intelligently. And that's some-thing that the simple time- and priority-management panaceascan't do.Every decision toact is an intuitiveone. The challengeis to migrate fromhoping it's the rightchoice to trustingit's the right choice.
You have more todo than you canpossibly do. Youjust need to feelgood about yourchoices.CHAPTER 2  I  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOW1. The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in the MomentAt 3:22 on Wednesday, how do you choose what to do? There arefour criteria you can apply, in this order:1 |C o n t e x t2 |T i m e  a v a i l a b l e3 |E n e r g y  a v a i l a b l e4 |P r i o r i t yContext A few actions can be done anywhere (like drafting ideasabout a project with pen and paper), but most require a specificlocation (at home, at your office) or having some productivity toolat hand, such as a phone or a computer. These are the first factorsthat limit your choices about what you can do in the moment.Time Available When do you have to do something else} Hav-ing a meeting in five minutes would prevent doing many actionsthat require more time.Energy Available How much energy do you have? Some actionsyou have to do require a reservoir of fresh, creative mental energy.Others need more physical horsepower. Some need very little ofeither.Priority Given your context, time, and energy available, whataction will give you the highest payoff? You have an hour, you'rein your office with a phone and a computer, and your energy is 7.3on a scale of 10. Should you call the client back, work on the pro-posal, process your voice-mails and e-mails, or check in with yourspouse to see how his or her day is going?This is where you need to access your intution and begin torely on your judgment call in the moment. To explore that con-cept further, let's examine two more models for deciding what's"most important" for you to be doing.4950THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE2. The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily WorkWhen you're getting things done, or "working" in the universalsense, there are three different kinds of activities you can beengaged in:• Doing predefined work• Doing work as it shows up• Defining your workDoing Predefined Work When you're doing predefined work,you're working off your "Next Actions" lists—completing tasksthat you have previously determined need to be done, managingyour workflow. You're making the calls you need to make, draftingideas you want to brainstorm, or preparing a list of things to talkto your attorney about.Doing Work as It Shows Up Often things come up ad hoc—unsuspected, unforeseen—that you either have to or choose torespond to as they occur. For example, your partner walks intoyour office and wants to have a conversation about the new prod-uct launch, so you talk to her instead of doing all the other thingsyou could be doing. Every day brings surprises—unplanned-forthings that just show up, and you'll need to expend at least sometime and energy on many of them. When you follow these leads,you're deciding by default that these things are more importantthan anything else you have to do.Defining Your Work Defining your work entails clearing up yourin-basket, your e-mail, your voice-mail, and your meeting notesand breaking down new projects into actionable steps. As youprocess your inputs, you'll no doubt be taking care of some less-than-two-minute actions and tossing and filing numerous things(another version of doing work as it shows up). A good portion ofthis activity will consist of identifying things that need to getCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWdone sometime, but not right away. You'll be adding to all of yourlists as you go along.Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that yourlists of things to do are complete. And your context, time, andenergy available still allow you the option of more than one thingto do. The final thing to consider is the nature of your work, andits goals and standards.3. The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own WorkPriorities should drive your choices, but most models for deter-mining them are not reliable tools for much of our real workactivity. In order to know what your priorities are, you have toknow what your work is. And there are at least six different per-spectives from which to define that. To use an aerospace analogy,the conversation has a lot to do with the altitude.• 50,000+ feet: Life• 40,000 feet: Three- to five-year vision• 30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals• 20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility• 10,000 feet: Current projects• Runway: Current actionsLet's start from the bottom up:Runway: Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all theactions you need to take—all the phone calls you have to make,the e-mails you have to respond to, the errands you've got to run,and the agendas you want to communicate to your boss and yourspouse. You'd probably have three hundred to five hundred hours'worth of these things to do if you stopped the world right nowand got no more input from yourself or anyone else.10,000 Feet: Current Projects Creating many of the actions thatyou currently have in front of you are the thirty to one hundred5152THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEprojects on your plate. These are the relatively short-term out-comes you want to achieve, such as setting up a home computer,organizing a sales conference, moving to a new headquarters, andgetting a dentist.20,000 Feet: Areas of Responsibility You create or accept most ofyour projects because of your responsibilities, which for mostpeople can be defined in ten to fifteen categories. These are thekey areas within which you want to achieve results and maintainstandards. Your job may entail at least implicit commitmentsfor things like strategic planning, administrative support, staffdevelopment, market research, customer service, or asset manage-ment. And your personal life has an equal number of such focusarenas: health, family, finances, home environment, spirituality,recreation, etc. Listing and reviewing these responsibilities gives amore comprehensive framework for evaluating your inventory ofprojects.30,000 Feet: One- to Two-Year Goals What you want to be expe-riencing in the various areas of your life and work one to two yearsfrom now will add another dimension to defining your work.Often meeting the goals and objectives of your job will require ashift in emphasis of your job focus, with new areas of responsi-bility emerging. At this horizon personally, too, there probably arethings you'd like to accomplish or have in place, which could addimportance to certain aspects of your life and diminish others.40,000 Feet: Three- to Five-Year Vision Projecting three to fiveyears into the future generates thinking about bigger categories:organization strategies, environmental trends, career and life-transition circumstances. Internal factors include longer-termcareer, family, and financial goals and considerations. Outer-world issues could involve changes affecting your job and organi-zation, such as technology, globalization, market trends, andCHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF MASTERING WORKFLOWcompetition. Decisions at this altitude could easily change whatyour work might look like on many levels.50, 000+ Feet Life This is the "big picture" view. Why does yourcompany exist? Why do you exist? The primary purpose for any-thing provides the core definition of what its "work" really is. It isthe ultimate job description. All the goals, visions, objectives,projects, and actions derive from this, and lead toward it.These altitude analogies are somewhat arbitrary, and in reallife the important conversations you will have about your focusand your priorities may not fit exactly to one horizon or another.They can provide a useful framework, however, to remind you ofthe multilayered nature of your "job" and resulting commitmentsand tasks.Obviously, many factors must be considered before you feelcomfortable that you have made the best decision about what todo and when. "Setting priorities" in the traditional sense of focus-ing on your long-term goals and values, though obviously a neces-sary core focus, does not provide a practical framework for a vastmajority of the decisions and tasks you must engage in day to day.Mastering the flow of your work at all the levels you experiencethat work provides a much more holistic way to get things done,and feel good about it.Part 2 of this book will provide specific coaching about howto use these three models for making action choices, and how thebest practices for collecting, processing, planning, organizing, andreviewing all contribute to your greatest success with them.
53Getting Projects CreativelyUnder Way: The Five Phases ofProject PlanningYou've got to thinkabout the bigthings while you'redoing small things,so that all thesmall things go inthe right direction.—Alvin TofflerTHE KEY INGREDIENTS of relaxed control are (1) clearlydefined outcomes (projects) and the next actionsrequired to move them toward closure, and (2) re-minders placed in a trusted system that is reviewedregularly. This is what I call horizontal focus. Al-though it may seem simple, the actual application ofthe process can create profound results.Enhancing "Vertical" FocusHorizontal focus is all you'll need in most situations, most of thetime. Sometimes, however, you may need greater rigor and focusto get a project under control, to identify a solution,or to ensure that all the right steps have been deter-mined. This is where vertical focus comes in. Know-ing how to think productively in this more "vertical"way and how to integrate the results into your per-sonal system is the second powerful behavior setneeded for knowledge work.This kind of thinking doesn't have to be elabo-rate. Most of the thinking you'll need to do is infor-mal, what I call back-of-the-envelope planning—the kind ofthing you do literally on the back of an envelope in a coffee shopwith a colleague as you're hashing out the agenda and structure of54
The goal is to getprojects andsituations off yourmind, but not tolose any potentiallyuseful ideas.CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGa sales presentation. In my experience this tends to be the mostproductive kind of planning you can do in terms of your outputrelative to the energy you put into it. True, every once in a whileyou may need to develop a more formal structure or plan to clarifycomponents, sequences, or priorities. And more detailed outlineswill also be necessary to coordinate more complex situations—ifteams need to collaborate about various project pieces, for exam-ple, or if business plans need to be drafted to convince an investoryou know what you're doing. But as a general rule, you can bepretty creative with nothing more than an envelope and a pencil.The greatest need I've seen in project thinking in the profes-sional world is not for more formal models; usually the peoplewho need those models already have them or can get them as partof an academic or professional curriculum. Instead, I've foundthe biggest gap to be the lack of a project-focusing model for"the rest of us." We need ways to validate and support our think-ing, no matter how informal. Formal planning sessions and high-horsepower planning tools (such as project software) can certainlybe useful, but too often the participants in a meeting will need tohave another meeting—a back-of-the-envelope session—toactu-ally get a piece of work fleshed out and under control. More for-mal and structured meetings also tend to skip over at least onecritical issue, such as why the project is being done in the firstplace. Or they don't allow adequate time for brainstorming, thedevelopment of a bunch of ideas nobody's ever thought about thatwould make the project more interesting, more profitable, or justmore fun. And finally, very few such meetings bring to bear suffi-cient rigor in determining action steps and accountabilities for thevarious aspects of a project plan.The good news is, there is a productive way to think aboutprojects, situations, and topics that creates maximum value withminimal expenditure of time and effort. It happens to be the waywe naturally think and plan, though not necessarily the way wenormally plan when we consciously try to get a project under con-trol. In my experience, when people do more planning, more55THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEinformally and naturally, they relieve a great deal of stress andobtain better results.The Natural Planning ModelYou're already familiar with the most brilliant and creative plan-ner in the world: your brain. You yourself are actually a planningmachine. You're planning when you get dressed, eatlunch, go to the store, or simply talk. Although theprocess may seem somewhat random, a quite com-plex series of steps in fact has to occur before yourbrain can make anything happen physically. Yourmind goes through five steps to accomplish virtuallyany task:
561 |D e f i n i n g  p u r p o s e  a n d  p r i n c i p l e s2 |O u t c o m e  v i s i o n i n g3 |B r a i n s t o r m i n g4 |O r g a n i z i n g5 |I d e n t i f y i n g  n e x t  a c t i o n sA Simple Example: Planning Dinner OutThe last time you went out to dinner, what initially caused you tothink about doing it? It could have been any number of things—the desire to satisfy hunger, socialize with friends, celebrate a spe-cial occasion, sign a business deal, or develop a romance. As soonas any of these turned into a real inclination that you wanted tomove on, you started planning. Your intention was your purpose,and it automatically triggered your internal planning process.Your principles created the boundaries of your plan. You probablydidn't consciously think about your principles regarding going outto dinner, but you thought within them: standards of food andservice, affordability, convenience, and comfort all may haveThe mostexperienced plannerin the world is yourbrain.CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGplayed a part. In any case, your purpose and principles were thedefining impetus and boundaries of your planning.Once you decided to fulfill your purpose, what were yourfirst substantive thoughts? Probably not "point II.A.3.b. in plan."Your first ideas were more likely things like "Italian food at Gio-vanni's," or "Sitting at a sidewalk table at the Bistro Cafe." Youprobably also imagined some positive picture of what you mightexperience or how the evening would turn out—maybe the peo-ple involved, the atmosphere, and/or the outcome. That was youroutcome visioning. Whereas your purpose was the why of yourgoing out to dinner, your vision was an image of the what—of thephysical world's looking, sounding, and feeling the ways that bestfulfilled your purpose.Once you'd identified with your vision, what did your mindnaturally begin doing? What did it start to think about? "Whattime should we go?" "Is it open tonight?" "Will it be crowded?""What's the weather like?" "Should we change clothes?" "Is theregas in the car?" "How hungry are we?" That was brainstorming.Those questions were part of the naturally creative process thathappens once you commit to some outcome that hasn't happenedyet. Your brain noticed a gap between what you were l o o k i n gtoward and where you actually were at the time, and it began toresolve that "cognitive dissonance" by trying to fill in the blanks.This is the beginning of the "how" phase of natural planning. Butit did the thinking in a somewhat random and ad hoc fashion.Lots of different aspects of going to dinner just occurred to you.You almost certainly didn't need to actually write all of themdown on a piece of paper, but you did a version of that process inyour mind.*Once you had generated a sufficient number of ideas a n ddetails, you couldn't help but start to organize them. You may*If, however, you were handling the celebration for your best friend's recent tri-umph, the complexity and detail that might accrue in your head should warrantat least the back of an envelope!57THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEhave thought or said, "First we need to find out if the restaurant isopen", or "Let's call the Andersons and see if they'd like to go outwith us." Once you've generated various thoughts relevant to theoutcome, your mind will automatically begin to sort t h e m  b ycomponents (subprojects), priorities, and/or sequences of events.Components would be: "We need to handle logistics, people, andlocation." Priorities would be: "It's critical to find out if the clientreally would like to go to dinner." Sequences would be: "First weneed to check whether the restaurant is open, then call theAndersons, then get dressed."Finally (assuming that you're really committed to the project—in this case, going out to dinner), you focus on the next action thatyou need to take to make the first component actually happen. "CallSuzanne's to see if it's open, and make the reservation."These five phases of project planning occur naturally foreverything you accomplish during the day. It's how you createthings—dinner, a relaxing evening, a new product, or a new com-pany. You have an urge to make something happen; you image theoutcome; you generate ideas that might be relevant; you sort thoseinto a structure; and you define a physical activity that wouldbegin to make it a reality. And you do all of that naturally, withoutgiving it much thought.Natural Planning Is Not Necessarily NormalBut is the process described above the way your committee isplanning the church retreat? Is it how your IT team is approach-ing the new system installation? Is it how you're organizing thewedding or thinking through the potential merger?Have you clarified the primary purpose of the project and com-municated it to everyone who ought to know it? And have youagreed on the standards and behaviors you'll need toadhere to to make it successful?Have you envisioned success and consideredall the innovative things that might result if youachieved it?58Have youenvisioned wildsuccess lately?CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGHave you gotten all possible ideas out on the table—everything you need to take into consideration that might affectthe outcome?Have you identified the mission-critical components, keymilestones, and deliverables?Have you defined all the aspects of the project that could bemoved on right now, what the next action is for each part, andwho's responsible for what?If you're like most people I interact with in a coaching orconsulting capacity, the collective answer to these qu e s t i o ns  i s ,probably not. There are likely to be at least some components ofthe natural planning model that you haven't implemented.In some of my seminars I get participants to actually plan acurrent strategic project that uses this model. In only a few minutesthey walk themselves through all five phases, and usually end upbeing amazed at how much progress they've made compared withwhat they have tried to do in the past. One gentleman came upafterward and told me, "I don't know whether I should thank you orbe angry. I just finished a business plan I've been telling myselfwould take months, and now I have no excuses for not doing it!"You can try it for yourself right now if you like. Choose oneproject that is new or stuck or that could simply use someimprovement. Think of your purpose. Think of what a successfuloutcome would look like: where would you be physically, finan-cially, in terms of reputation, or whatever? Brainstorm potentialsteps. Organize your ideas. Decide on the next actions. Are youany clearer about where you want to go and how to get there?The Unnatural Planning ModelTo emphasize the importance of utilizing the natural planningmodel for the more complex things we're involved with, let's con-trast it with the more "normal" model used in mostenvironments—what I call unnatural planning.59THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEWhen the "Good Idea" Is a Bad IdeaHave you ever heard a well-intentioned manager start a meetingwith the question, "OK, so who's got a good idea about this?"What is the assumption here? Before any evaluation ofwhat's a "good idea" can be trusted, the purpose mustbe clear, the vision must be well defined, and all therelevant data must have been collected (brain-stormed) and analyzed (organized). "What's a goodidea?" is a good question, but only when you're about80 percent of the way through your thinking! Start-ing there would probably blow anyone's creativemental fuses.Trying to approach any situation from a perspective that is notthe natural way your mind operates will be difficult. People do it allthe time, but it almost always engenders a lack of clarity andincreased stress. In interactions with others, it opens the door foregos, politics, and hidden agendas to take over the discussion (gen-erally speaking, the most verbally aggressive will run the show).And if it's just you, attempting to come up with a "good idea" beforedefining your purpose, creating a vision, and collecting lots of initialbad ideas is likely to give you a case of creative constipation.Let's Blame Mrs. WilliamsIf you're like most people in our culture, the only formal trainingyou've ever had in planning and organizing proactively was in thefourth or fifth grade. And even if that wasn't the only educationyou've had in this area, it was probably the most emotionallyintense (meaning it sank in the deepest).Mrs. Williams, my fourth-grade teacher, had toteach us about organizing our thinking (it was in herlesson plans). We were going to learn to write reports.But in order to write a well-organized, successfulreport, what did we have to write first? That's right—an outline!60If you're waiting tohave a good ideabefore you have anyideas, you won'thave many ideas.
Outlines were easy,as long as youwrote the reportfirst.CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGDid you ever have to do that, create an outline to begin with?Did you ever stare at a Roman numeral I at the top of your pagefor a torturous period of time and decide that planning and orga-nizing ahead of time were for people very different f r o m  y o u ?Probably.In the end, I did learn to write outlines. I just wrote thereport first, then made up an outline from the report, after thefact.That's what most people learned about planning from oureducational system. And I still see outlines done after the fact, justto please the authorities. In the business world, they're oftenheaded "Goals" and "Objectives." But they still have very little todo with what people are doing or what they're inspired about.These documents are sitting in drawers and in e-mails some-where, bearing little relationship to operational reality.The Reactive Planning ModelThe unnatural planning model is what most people consciouslythink of as "planning," and because it's so often artificial andirrelevant to real work, people just don't plan. At least not on thefront end: they resist planning meetings, presentations, andstrategic operations until the last minute.But what happens if you don't plan ahead oftime? In many cases, crisis! ("Didn't you get the tick-ets? I thought you were going to do that?!") Then,when the urgency of the last minute is upon you, thereactive planning model ensues.What's the first level of focus when the stuffhits the fan? Action! Work harder! Overtime! More people! Getbusier! And a lot of stressed-out people are thrown at the situa-tion.Then, when having a lot of busy people banging intoeach other doesn't resolve the situation, someone gets more61When you findyourself in a hole,stop digging.—WillTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONEsophisticated and says, "We need to get organized!" (Catching onnow?) Then people draw boxes around the problem and l a b e lthem. Or redraw the boxes and relabel them.At some point they realize that just redrawingboxes isn't really doing much to solve the problem.Now someone (much more sophisticated) suggeststhat more creativity is needed. "Let's brainstorm!"With everyone in the room, the boss asks, "So, who'sgot a good idea here?" (Thank you, Mrs. Williams.)When not much happens, the boss may surmise that his staffhas used up most of its internal creativity. Time to hire a consul-tant! Of course, if the consultant is worth his salt, at some pointhe is probably going to ask the big question: "So, what are youreally trying to do here, anyway?" (vision,purpose).The reactive style is the reverse of the natural model. It willalways come back to a top-down focus. It's not a matter ofwhether the natural planning will be done—just when, and atwhat cost.
62Natural Planning Techniques: The Five PhasesIt goes without saying, but still it must be said again: thinking inmore effective ways about projects and situations can make thingshappen sooner, better, and more successfully. So if our minds plannaturally anyway, what can we learn from that? How can we usethat model to facilitate getting more and better results in ourthinking?Let's examine each of the five phases of natural planning andsee how we can leverage these contexts.PurposeIt never hurts to ask the "why?" question. Almost anything you'recurrently doing can be enhanced and even galvanized by moreDon't just dosomething. Standthere.—Rochelle MyerCHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGscrutiny at this top level of focus. Why are you goingto your next meeting? What's the purpose of yourtask? Why are you having friends over for a barbequein the backyard? Why are you hiring a marketingdirector? Why do you have a budget?I admit it: this is nothing but advanced commonsense. To know and to be clear about the purpose ofany activity are prime directives for clarity, creativedevelopment,  and cooperation.  But it's commonsense that's not commonly practiced, simply because it's so easyfor us to create things, get caught up in the form of what we'vecreated, and let our connection with our real and primary inten-tions slip.I know, based upon thousands of hours spent in many officeswith many sophisticated people, that the "why?" question cannotbe ignored. When people complain to me about having too manymeetings, I have to ask, "What is the purpose of the meetings?"When they ask, "Who should I invite to the planning session?" Ihave to ask, "What's the purpose of the planning session?" Untilwe have the answer to my questions, there's no possible way tocome up with an appropriate response to theirs.The Value of Thinking About "Why"Here are just some of the benefits of asking "why?":• It defines success.• It creates decision-making criteria.• It aligns resources.• It motivates.• It clarifies focus.• It expands options.Let's take a closer look at each of these in turn.People love to win.If you're not totallyclear about thepurpose of whatyou're doing, youhave no chance ofwinning.63Fanaticismconsists ofredoubling yourefforts when youhave forgottenyour aim.—GeorgeTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEabout the purpose of what you're doing, you have nochance of winning. Purpose defines success. It's theprimal reference point for any investment of timeand energy, from deciding to run for elective office todesigning a form.Ultimately you can't feel good about a staffmeeting unless you know what the purpose of themeeting was. And if you want to sleep well, you'd better have agood answer when your board asks why you fired your V . P .  o fmarketing or hired that hotshot M.B.A. as your new financedirector. You won't really know whether or not your business planis any good until you hold it up against the success criterion thatyou define by answering the question "Why do we need a businessplan?"It Creates Decision-Making Criteria How do you decide whetherto spend the money for a five-color brochure or justgo with a two-color? How do you know whether it'sworth hiring a major Web design firm to handle yournew Web site?It all comes down to purpose. Given what you'retrying to accomplish, are these resource investmentsrequired, and if so, which ones? There's no way toknow until the purpose is clarified.It Aligns Resources How should we spend our staffing allocationin the corporate budget? How do we best use the cash flow rightnow to maximize our viability as a retailer over the next year?Should we spend more money on the luncheon or the speakers forthe monthly association meeting?In each case, the answer depends on what we're really tryingto accomplish—the why.64It Defines Success    People are starved for "wins" these days. Welove to play games, and we like to win, or at least be in a positionwhere we could win. And if you're not totally clearCelebrate anyprogress. Don't•wait to get perfect.—Ann McGeeCooper
Often the only wayto make a harddecision is to comeback to thepurpose.CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGIt Motivates Let's face it: if there's no good reason to be doingsomething, it's not worth doing. I'm often stunned by how manypeople have forgotten why they're doing what they're doing—andby how quickly a simple question like "Why are you doing that?"can get them back on track.It Clarifies Focus When you land on the real purpose for any-thing you're doing, it makes things clearer. Just taking two min-utes and writing out your primary reason for doing somethinginvariably creates an increased sharpness of vision, much likebringing a telescope into focus. Frequently, projects and situationsthat have begun to feel scattered and blurred grow clearer whensomeone brings it back home by asking, "What are we really try-ing to accomplish here?"It Expands Options    Paradoxically, even as purpose brings thingsinto pinpoint focus, it opens up creative thinking about widerpossibilities. When you really know the underlying"why"—for the conference, for the staff party, for theelimination of the management position, or for themerger—it expands your thinking about how tomake the desired result happen. When people writeout their purpose for a project in my seminars, theyoften claim it's like a fresh breeze blowing throughtheir mind, clarifying their vision of what they'redoing.Is your purpose clear and specific enough? If you're trulyexperiencing the benefits of a purpose focus—motivation, clarity,decision-making criteria, alignment, and creativity—then yourpurpose probably is specific enough. But many "purpose state-ments" are too vague to produce such results. "To have a gooddepartment," for example, might be too broad a goal. After all,what constitutes a "good department"? Is it a group of people whoare highly motivated, collaborating in healthy ways, and taking65If you're not surewhy you're doingsomething, you cannever do enoughof it.THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEinitiative? Or is it a department that comes in under budget? Inother words, if you don't really know when you've met your pur-pose or when you're off track, you don't have a viable directive.The question "How will I know when this is off-purpose?" musthave a clear answer.PrinciplesOf equal value as prime criteria for driving and directing a project arethe standards and values you hold. Although people seldom thinkabout these consciously, they are always there. And if they are vio-lated, the result will inevitably be unproductive distraction and stress.A great way to think about what your principlesare is to complete this sentence: "I would give otherstotally free rein to do this as long as they. . ."—what?What policies, stated or unstated, will apply to yourgroup's activities? "As long as they stayed withinbudget"? "satisfied the client"? "ensured a healthyteam"? "promoted a positive image"?It can be a major source of stress when othersengage in or allow behavior that's outside your stan-dards. If you never have to deal with this issue, you'retruly graced. If you do, some constructive conversa-.tion about and clarification of principles couldalign the energy and prevent unnecessary conflict.You may want to begin by asking yourself, "What behaviormight undermine what I'm doing, and how can I preventit?" That will give you a good starting point for defining yourstandards.Another great reason for focusing on principles is the clarityand reference point they provide for positive conduct. How doyou want or need to work with others on this project to ensure itssuccess? You yourself are at your best when you're acting how?Whereas purpose provides the juice and the direction,principles define the parameters of action and the criteria forexcellence of behavior.66Simple, clearpurpose andprinciples give riseto complex andintelligentbehavior. Complexrules andregulations giverise to simple andstupid behavior.—DeeCHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGVision/OutcomeIn order most productively to access the conscious and uncon-scious resources available to you, you must have a clear picture inyour mind of what success would look, sound, and feel like. Pur-pose and principles furnish the impetus and the monitoring, butvision provides the actual blueprint of the final result. This is the"what?" instead of the "why?" What will this project or situationreally be like when it successfully appears in the world?For example, graduates of your seminar are demonstratingconsistently applied knowledge of the subject matter. Marketshare has increased 2 percent within the northeastern region overthe last fiscal year. Your daughter is clear about your guidelinesand support for her first semester in college.The Power of FocusSince the 1960s thousands of books have expounded on the valueof appropriate positive imagery and focus. Forward-looking focushas even been a key element in Olympic-level sports training,with athletes imagining the physical effort, the positive energy,and the successful result to ensure the highest level of unconscioussupport for their performance.We know that the focus we hold in our mindsaffects what we perceive and how we perform. This isas true on the golf course as it is in a staff meeting orduring a serious conversation with a spouse. Myinterest lies in providing a model for focus that isdynamic in a practical way, especially in projectthinking.When you focus on something—the vacation you're goingtotake, the meeting you're about to go into, the product you want tolaunch—that focus instantly creates ideas and thought patternsyou wouldn't have had otherwise. Even your physiology willrespond to an image in your head as if it were reality.67Imagination ismore importantthan knowledge.—Albert EinsteinTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEThe Reticular Activating System The May 1957 issue of ScientificAmerican contained an article describing the discovery of thereticular formation at the base of the brain. The reticular forma-tion is basically the gateway to your conscious awareness; it's theswitch that turns on your perception of ideas and data, the thingthat keeps you asleep even when music's playing but wakes you ifa special little baby cries in another room.Just like a computer, your brain has a searchfunction—but it's even more phenomenal than acomputer's. It seems to be programmed by what wefocus on and, more primarily, what we identify with.It's the seat of what many people have referred to asthe paradigms we maintain. We notice only whatmatches our internal belief systems and identifiedcontexts. If you're an optometrist, for example, you'lltend to notice people wearing eyeglasses across acrowded room; if you're a building contractor, youmay notice the room's physical details. If you focuson the color red right now and then just glancearound your environment, if there is any red at all,you'll see even the tiniest bits of it.The implications of how this filtering works—how we are unconsciously made conscious of infor-mation—could fill a weeklong seminar. Suffice it tosay that something automatic and extraordinary hap-pens in your mind when you create and focus on aclear picture of what you want.Clarifying OutcomesThere is a simple but profound principle thatemerges from understanding the way your perceptivefilters work: you won't see how to do it until you seeyourself doing it.It's easy to envision something happening if it has happenedbefore or you have had experience with similar successes. It can be68Your automaticcreative mechanismis teleological. Thatis, it operates interms of goals andend results. Onceyou give it adefinite goal toachieve, you candepend upon itsautomatic guidancesystem to take youto that goal muchbetter than "you"ever could byconscious thought."You" supply thegoal by thinking interms of endresults. Yourautomaticmechanism thensupplies the meanswhereby.—Maxwell MaltzCHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGquite a challenge, however, to identify with images o fsuccess if they represent new and foreign territory—that is, if you have few reference points about whatan event might actually look like and little experienceof your own ability to make it happen.Many of us hold ourselves back from imaging adesired outcome unless someone can show us how to get there.Unfortunately, that's backward in terms of how our minds workto generate and recognize solutions and methods.One of the most powerful skills in the world of knowledgework, and one of the most important to hone and develop, is cre-ating clear outcomes. This is not as self-evident as itmay sound. We need to constantly define (and rede-fine) what we're trying to accomplish on many differ-ent   levels,   and   consistently   reallocate   resourcestoward getting these tasks completed as effectivelyand efficiently as possible.What will this project look like when it's done?How do you want the client to feel, and what do you want him toknow and do, after the presentation? Where will you be in yourcareer three years from now? How would the ideal V.P. of financedo his job? What would your Web site really look like and have ascapabilities if it could be the way you wanted it?Outcome/vision can range from a simple statement of theproject, such as "Finalize computer-system implementation,"to a completely scripted movie depicting the future scene in allits glorious detail. Here are three basic steps for d e v e l o p i n g  avision:1 |   View the project from beyond the completion date.2 |   Envision "WILD SUCCESS"! (Suspend "Yeah, but. . .")3 |   Capture features, aspects, qualities you imagine in place.When I get people to focus on a successful scenario of theirproject, they usually experience heightened enthusiasm and think69You often need tomake it up in yourmind before youcan make it happenin your life.
I always wanted tobe somebody. Ishould have beenmore specific.—LilyTHE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEof something unique and positive about it that hadn't occurred tothem before. "Wouldn't it be great if. . ." is not a bad way to startthinking about a situation, at least for long enough to have theoption of getting an answer.The best way to geta good idea is toget lots of ideas.—Linus Pauling
Your mind wants tofill in the blanksbetween here andthere, but insomewhat randomorder.BrainstormingOnce you know what you want to have happen, andwhy, the "how" mechanism is brought into play.When you identify with some picture in your mindthat is different from your current reality, you auto-matically start filling in the gaps, or brainstorming.Ideas begin to pop into your head in somewhat ran-dom order—little ones, big ones, not-so-good ones,good ones. This process usually goes on internally formost people about most things, and that's often suf-ficient. For example, you think about what you wantto say to your boss as you're walking down the hall tospeak to her. But there are many other instanceswhen writing things down, or capturing them insome external way, can give a tremendous boost toproductive output and thinking.
70Capturing Your IdeasOver the last few decades, a number of graphics-oriented brain-storming techniques have been introduced to help develop cre-ative thinking about projects and topics. They've been calledthings like mind-mapping, clustering, patterning, webbing, andfish-boning. Although the authors of these various processes mayportray them as being different from one another, for most of usend-users the basic premise remains the same: give yourself per-mission to capture and express any idea, and then later on figureout how it fits in and what to do with it. If nothing else (and thereis plenty of "else"), this practice adds to your efficiency—whenyou have the idea, you grab it, which means you won't have to go"have the idea" again.CHAPTER 3 |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGThe most popular of these techniques is called mind-mapping, a name coined by Tony Buzan, a British researcher inbrain functioning, to label this process of brainstorming ideas onto agraphic format. In mind-mapping, the core idea is presented in thecenter, with associated ideas growing out in a somewhat free-formfashion around it. For instance, if I found out that I had to move myoffice, I might think about computers, changing my business cards,all the connections I'd have to change, new furniture, moving thephones, purging and packing, and so on. If I captured these thoughtsgraphically it might start to look something like this:
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONEYou could do this kind of mind-mapping on Post-its thatcould be stuck on a whiteboard, or you could input ideas into aword processor or outlining program on the computer.Distributed CognitionThe great thing about external brainstorming is that in addition tocapturing your original ideas, it can help generate many new onesthat might not have occurred to you if you didn't havea mechanism to hold your thoughts and continuallyreflect them back to you. It's as if your mind were tosay, "Look, I'm only going to give you as many ideasas you feel you can effectively use. If you're not col-lecting them in some trusted way, I won't give youthat many. But if you're actually doing somethingwith the ideas—even if it's just recording them forlater evaluation—then here, have a bunch! And, oh wow! Thatreminds me of another one, and another," etc.Psychologists are beginning to label this and similarprocesses "distributed cognition." It's getting things out of yourhead and into objective, reviewable formats. But my E n g l i s hteacher in high school didn't have to know about the theory togive me the key: "David," he said, "you're going to college, andyou're going to be writing papers. Write all your notes and quoteson separate three-by-five cards. Then, when you get r e a d y  t oorganize your thinking, just spread them all out on the floor, seethe structure, and figure out what you're missing." Mr. Edmund-son was teaching me a major piece of the naturalplanning model!Few people can hold their focus on a topic formore than a couple of minutes, without some objec-tive structure and tool or trigger to help them. Pick abig project you have going right now and just try tothink of nothing else for more than sixty seconds.This is pretty hard to do unless you have a pen andpaper in hand and use those "cognitive artifacts"72Nothing is moredangerous than anidea when it is theonly one you have.—Emile Chartier
Only he whohandles his ideaslightly is master ofhis ideas, and onlyhe who is master ofhis ideas is notenslaved by them.—Lin YutangCHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGas the anchor for your ideas. Then you can stay with it for hours.That's why good thinking can happen while you're working on acomputer document about a project, mind-mapping it on a legalpad of on a paper tablecloth in a hip restaurant, or just having ameeting about it with other people in a room that allows you tohold the context (a whiteboard with nice wet markers really helpsthere, too).Brainstorming KeysMany techniques can be used to facilitate brainstorming and out-of-the-box thinking. The basics principles, however, can be summedup as follows:• Don't judge, challenge, evaluate, or criticize.• Go for quantity, not quality.• Put analysis and organization in the background.Don't Judge, Challenge, Evaluate, or Criticize    It's easy for theunnatural planning model to rear its ugly head in brainstorming,making people jump to premature evaluations andcritiques of ideas. If you care even slightly about whata critic thinks, you'll censure your expressive processas you look for the "right" thing to say. There's a verysubtle distinction between keeping brainstorming ontarget with the topic and stifling the creative process.It's also important that brainstorming be put into theoverall context of the planning process, because ifyou think you're doing it just for its own sake, it can seem trite andinappropriately off course. If you can understand it instead assomething you're doing right now, for a certain period, before youmove toward a resolution at the end, you'll feel more comfortablegiving this part of the process its due.This is not to suggest that you should shut off critical think-ing, though—everything ought to be fair game at this stage. It'sjust wise to understand what kinds of thoughts you're having and73A good way to findout what somethingmight be is touncover ail thethings it's probablynot.74THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEto park them for use in the most appropriate way. The primarycriterion must be expansion, not contraction.Go for Quantity, Not Quality Going for quantity keeps yourthinking expansive. Often you won't know what's a good ideauntil you have it. And sometimes you'll realize it's a good idea, orthe germ of one, only later on. You know how shopping at a bigstore with lots of options lets you feel comfortable about yourchoice? The same holds true for project thinking. The greater thevolume of thoughts you have to work with, the better the contextyou can create for developing options and trusting your choices.Put Analysis and Organization in the Background Analysis andevaluation and organization of your thoughts should be given asfree a rein as creative out-of-the-box thinking. But in the brain-storming phase, this critical activity should not be the driver.Making a list can be a creative thing to do, a way to considerthe people who should be on your team, the customer r e q u i r e -ments for the software, or the components of the business plan.Just make sure to grab all that and keep going until you get intothe weeding and organizing of focus that make up the next stage.OrganizingIf you've done a thorough job of emptying your head of all thethings that came up in the brainstorming phase, you'll notice thata natural organization is emerging. As my high school Englishteacher suggested, once you get all the ideas out of your head andin front of your eyes, you'll automatically notice natural relation-ships and structure. This is what most people are referring towhen they talk about "project plans."Organizing usually happens when you identify componentsand subcomponents, sequences or events, and/or priorities. Whatare the things that must occur to create the final result? In whatorder must they occur? What is the most important element toensure the success of the project?CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY:.THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGThis is the stage in which you can make good use of struc-turing tools ranging from informal bullet points, scribbled liter-ally on the back of an envelope, to project-planningsoftware like Microsoft Project. When a project callsfor substantial objective control, you'll need sometype of hierarchical outline with components andsubcomponents, and/or a GANTT-type chart show-ing stages of the project laid out over time, withindependent and dependent parts and milestonesidentified in relationship to the whole.Creative thinking doesn't stop here; it just takes anotherform. Once you perceive a basic structure, your mind will starttrying to "fill in the blanks." Identifying three key things that youneed to handle on the project, for example, may cause you tothink of a fourth and a fifth when you see them all lined up.The Basics of OrganizingThe key steps here are:• Identify the significant pieces.• Sort by (one or more):• components• sequences• priorities•D e t a i l  t o  t h e  r e q u i r e d  d e g r e e .I have never seen any two projects that needed to haveexactly the same amount of structure and detail developed inorder to get things off people's minds and moving successfully.But almost all projects can use some form of creative thinkingfrom the left side of the brain, along the lines of "What's theplan?"Next ActionsThe final stage of planning comes down to decisions about theallocation and reallocation of physical resources to actually get75A "project plan"identifies thesmaller outcomes,which can then benaturally planned.76THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE«the project moving. The question to ask here is, "What's the nextaction?"As we noted in the previous chapter, this kind of grounded,reality-based thinking, combined with clarification of the desiredoutcome, forms the critical component of knowledge work. In myexperience, creating a list of what your real projects are and con-sistently managing your next action for each one will constitute90 percent of what is generally thought of as project planning.This "runway level" approach will make you "honest" about allkinds of things: Are you really serious about doing this? Who'sresponsible? Have you thought things through enough?At some point, if the project is an actionable one, this next-action decision must be made.* Answering the question aboutwhat specifically you would do about something physically if youhad nothing else to do will test the maturity of your thinkingabout the project. If you're not yet ready to answer that ques-tion, you have more to flesh out at some prior level in the naturalplanning sequence.The Basics• Decide on next actions for each of the current moving parts ofthe project.• Decide on the next action in the planning process, if necessary.Activating the "Moving Parts" A project is sufficiently plannedfor implementation when every next-action step has been decidedon every front that can actually be moved on without some othercomponent's having to be completed first. If the project has mul-tiple components, each of them should be assessed appropriatelyby asking, "Is there something that anyone could be doing on thisright now?" You could be coordinating speakers for the confer-*You can also plan nonactionable projects and not need a next action—for exam-ple, designing your dream house. The lack of a next action by default makes it a"someday/maybe" project. . . and that's fine for anything of that nature.CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGence, for instance, at the same time that you're finding the appro-priate site.In some cases there will be only one aspect that can be acti-vated, and everything else will depend on the results of that. Sothere may be only one next action, which will be the linchpin forall the rest.More to Plan? What if there's still more planning to be donebefore you can feel comfortable with what's next? There's still anaction step—it is just a process action. What's the next step in thecontinuation of planning? Drafting more ideas. E-mailing AnaMaria and Sean to get their input. Telling your assistant to set upa planning meeting with the product team.The habit of clarifying the next action on projects, no matterwhat the situation, is fundamental to you staying in relaxed control.When the Next Action Is Someone Else's ... I f  t h e  n e x t  a c t i o n  i snot yours, you must nevertheless clarify whose it is (this is a pri-mary use of the "Waiting For" action list). In a group-planningsituation, it isn't necessary for everyone to know what the nextstep is on every part of the project. Often all that's required is toallocate responsibility for parts of the project to the appropriatepersons and leave it up to them to identify next actions on theirparticular pieces.This next-action conversation forces organizational c l a r i t y.Issues and details emerge that don't show up until someone holdseveryone's "feet to the fire" about the physical-level reality ofresource allocation. It's a simple, practical discussion to foster, andone that can significantly stir the pot and identify weak links.How Much Planning Do You Really Need to Do?How much of this planning model do you really need to flesh out,and to what degree of detail? The simple answer is, as much asyou need to get the project off your mind.In general, the reason things are on your mind is that the77THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE   j   PART ONEoutcome and the action step(s) have not been appropriatelydefined, and/or reminders of them have not been put i n  p l a c e swhere you can be trusted to look for them appropriately. Addi-tionally, you may not have developed the details, perspectives, andsolutions sufficiently to trust the efficacy of your blueprint.Most projects, given my definition of a project as an outcomerequiring more than one action, need no more than a listingof their outcome and next action for you to getthem off your mind. You need a new stockbroker?You just have to call a friend for a recommenda-tion. You want to set up a printer at home? Youjust need to surf the Web to check out differentmodels and prices. I estimate that 80 percent ofprojects are of that nature. You'll still be doing the full planningmodel on all of them, but only in your head, and just enoughto figure out next actions and keep them going until they'recomplete.Another 15 percent or so of projects might require at leastsome external form of brainstorming—maybe a mind-map or afew notes in a word processor or PowerPoint file. That might besufficient for planning meeting agendas, your vacation, or aspeech to the local chamber of commerce.A final 5 percent of projects might need the deliberate appli-cation of one or more of the five phases of the natural planningmodel. The model provides a practical recipe for unstickingthings, resolving them, and moving them forward productively.Are you aware of a need for greater clarity, or greater action, onany of your projects? If so, using the model can often be the key tomaking effective progress.Need More Clarity?If greater clarity is what you need, shift your thinking up thenatural planning scale. People are often very busy {action) butnonetheless experience confusion and a lack of clear direction.They need to pull out their plan, or create one {organize). If there's78If the project is stillon your mind,there's moreplanning to do.CHAPTER 3  I   GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGa lack of clarity at the planning level, there's probably a need formore brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas tocreate trust in the plan. If the brainstorming session gets boggeddown with fuzzy thinking, the focus should shift back to thevision of the outcome, ensuring that the reticular filter in the brainwill open up to deliver the best how-to thinking. If the outcome/vision is unclear, you must return to a clean analysis of why you'reengaged in the situation in the first place {purpose).Need More to Be Happening?If more action is what's needed, you need to move down themodel. There may be enthusiasm about the purpose of a projectbut at the same time some resistance to actuallyfleshing out what fulfilling it in the real world mightlook like. These days, the task of "improving qualityof work life" may be on the radar for a manager, butoften he won't yet have defined a clear picture of thedesired result. The thinking must go to the specificsof the vision. Again, ask yourself, "What would theoutcome look like?"If you've formulated an answer to that question, but thingsare still stuck, it's probably time for you to grapple with some ofthe "how" issues and the operational details and perspectives{brainstorming). I often have clients who have inherited a relativelyclearly articulated project, like "Implement the new performance-review system," but who aren't moving forward because theyhaven't yet taken a few minutes to dump some ideas out aboutwhat that might entail.If brainstorming gets hung up (and very often it does formore "blue sky" types), rigor may be required to do some evalua-tion of and decision-making about mission-critical deliverablesthat have to be handled {organizing). This is sometimes the casewhen an informal back-and-forth meeting that has generated lotsof ideas ends without producing any decision about what actuallyneeds to happen next on the project.79Plans get you intothings but you'vegot to work yourway out.—THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONEAnd if there is a plan, but the rubber still isn't hitting theroad like it should, someone needs to assess each component withthe focus of "What's the next action, and who's got it?" One man-ager, who had taken over responsibility many months in advancefor organizing a major annual conference, asked me how to pre-vent the crisis all-nighters her team had experienced near thedeadline the previous year. When she produced an outline of thevarious pieces of the project she'd inherited, I asked, "Whichpieces could actually be moved on right now?" After identifyinghalf a dozen, we clarified the next action on each one. It was offand running.In the last two chapters, I have covered the basic models of how tostay maximally productive and in control, with minimal effort, atthe two most basic levels of our life and work: the actions we takeand the projects we enter into that generate many of thoseactions.The fundamentals remain true—you must beresponsible for collecting all your open loops, apply-ing a front-end thought process to each of them, andmanaging the results with organization, review, andaction.For all those situations that you have any levelof commitment to complete, there is a natural plan-ning process that goes on to get you from here tothere. Leveraging that five-phase model can oftenmake the evolution easier, faster, and more productive.These models are simple to understand and easy to imple-ment. Applying them creates remarkable results. You need essen-tially no new skills—you already know how to write things down,clarify outcomes, decide next actions, put things into categories,review it all, and make intuitive choices. Right now you have theability to focus on successful results, brainstorm, o r g a n i z e  y o u rthinking, and get moving on your next steps.But just knowing how to do all of those things does not pro-80You need no newskills to increaseyour productivity-just a new set ofbehaviors aboutwhen and where toapply them.CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNINGduce results. Merely having the ability to be highly productive,relaxed, and in control doesn't make you that way. If you're likemost people, you can use a coach—someone to walk you step bystep through the experience and provide some guideposts andhandy tricks along the way, until your new operational style is ele-gantly embedded.You'll find that in part 2.
81part2PracticingStress-FreeProductivityGetting Started: Setting Upthe Time, Space, and ToolsIN PART 2 we'll move from a conceptual framework and limitedapplication of workflow mastery to full-scale implementation andbest practices. Going through this program often gives people alevel of relaxed control they may never have experienced before,but it usually requires the catalyst of step-by-step procedures toget there. To that end, I'll provide a logical sequence of things todo, to make it as easy as possible for you to get on board and gleanthe most value from these techniques.Implementation—Whether Ail-Out orCasual—Is a Lot About "Tricks"If you're not sure you're committed to an all-out implementationof these methods, let me assure you that a lot of the value peopleget from this material is good "tricks." Sometimesjust one good trick can make it worthwhile to rangethrough this information: I've had people tell me, forexample, that the best thing they got from my two-day seminar was advice on setting up and using atickler file. Tricks are for the not-so-smart, not-so-conscious part of us. To a great degree, the highest-performing people I know are those who haveinstalled the best tricks in their lives. I know that's85
It is easier to actyourself into abetter way offeeling than to feelyourself into abetter way ofaction.—0. H. MowrerPRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOtrue of me. The smart part of us sets up things for us to do that thenot-so-smart part responds to almost automatically, c r e a t i n gbehavior that produces high-performance results. We trick our-selves into doing what we ought to be doing.For instance, if you're a semiregular exerciser like me, youprobably have your own little tricks to get you to exercise. My besttrick is costume—the clothing I put on or take off. If I put on exer-cise gear, I'll start to feel like exercising; if I don't, I'm very likelyto feel like doing something else.Let's look at an example of a real productivity trick. You'veprobably taken work home that you had to bring back the nextday, right? It was mission-critical that you not forget it the nextmorning. So where did you put it the night before? Did you put itin front of the door, or on your keys, so you'd be sure to take itwith you? For this you got a higher education? What a sophisti-cated piece of self-management technology you've installed inyour life! But actually that's just what it is. The smart part of youthe night before knows that the not-so-smart part of you firstthing in the morning may barely be conscious. "What's this infront of the door!? Oh, that's right, I've got to take this with me!"What a class act. But really, it is. It's a trick I c a l l  P ut  I t  i nFront of the Door. For our purposes the "door" is going to be thedoor of your mind, not your house. But it's the same idea.If you were to take out your calendar right now and lookclosely at every single item for the next fourteendays, you'd probably come up with at least one "Oh-that-reminds-me-I-need-to_____________ ." If youthen cap-tured that value-added thought into some place thatwould trigger you to act, you'd feel better already,have a clearer head, and get more positive thingsdone. It's not rocket science, just a good trick.If you take out a clean sheet of paper right now,along with your favorite writing instrument, and forthree minutes focus solely on the most awesome proj-ect on your mind, I guarantee you'll have at least one86You increaseyour productivityand creativityexponentially whenyou think about theright things at theright time and havethe tools to captureyour value-addedthinking.CHAPTER 4 |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLS"Oh, yeah, I need to consider __ ." Then capture what shows upin your head on the piece of paper and put it where you mightactually use the idea or information. You won't be one ouncesmarter than you were ten minutes ago, but you'll have addedvalue to your work and life.Much of learning how to manage workflow in a "black belt"way is about laying out the gear and practicing the moves so thatthe requisite thinking happens more automatically and it's a loteasier to get engaged in the game. The suggestions that followabout getting time, space, and tools in place are all trusted meth-ods for making things happen at a terrific new level.If you're sincere about making a major leap forward in yourpersonal management systems, I recommend that you pay closeattention to the details and follow through on the suggestionsprovided below in their entirety. The whole will be greater thanthe sum of the parts. You'll also discover that the execution of thisprogram will produce real progress on real things that are goingon in your life right now. We'll get lots done that you want to getdone, in new and efficient ways that may amaze you.Setting Aside the TimeI recommend that you create a block of time to initialize thisprocess and prepare a workstation with the appropriate space, fur-niture, and tools. If your space is properly set up and streamlined,it can reduce your unconscious resistance to dealing with yourstuff and even make it attractive for you to sit down and crankthrough your input and your work. An ideal time frame for mostpeople is two whole days, back to back. (Don't be put off by that ifyou don't have that long to spend, though: doing any of the activi-ties I suggest will be useful, no matter how much or how littletime you devote to them. Two days are not required to benefitfrom these techniques and principles—they will start to pay offalmost instantly.) Implementing the full collection process can87PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOtake up to six hours or more, and processing and deciding onactions for all the input you'll want to externalize and capture intoyour system can easily take another eight hours. Of course youcan also collect and process your stuff in chunks, but it'll be mucheasier if you can tackle that front-end portion in one fell swoop.The ideal time for me to work with a professional is on aweekend or holiday because the chance of outside disturbance isminimal then. If I work with someone on a typical workday, wefirst make sure that no meetings are scheduled and only emer-gency interruptions are allowed; phone calls are routed to voice-mail, or logged by secretaries for review and handling during abreak. I don't recommend using "after hours" for this work. It usu-ally means seriously reduced horsepower and a big tendency toget caught up in "rabbit trails." *For many of the executives I work with, holding the world backfor two contiguous days is the hardest part of the whole process—the perceived necessity to be constantly available for meetings andcommunications when they're "at work" is difficult for them to let goof. That's why we often resort to weekends. If you work in an opencubicle or office, it will be even more of a challenge to isolate suffi-cient time blocks on a regular workday during office hours.It's not that the procedure itself is so "sacred"; it's just that ittakes a lot of psychic energy to collect and processsuch a large inventory of open loops, especially whenthey've been "open," "undecided," or "stuck" for waytoo long. Interruptions can double the time it takesto get through everything. If you can get to groundzero in one contained time period, it gives you a hugesense of control and accomplishment and frees up areservoir of energy and creativity. Later on you can
88*After hours is actually a good time to crank through a group of similar tasksthat you wouldn't normally do in the course of your t y p i c a l  w o r k d a y ,  l i k efilinga big backlog of papers, organizing photographs, surfing the Web about yourupcoming vacation location, or processing expense receipts.Dedicate two daysto this process, andit will be worthmany times that interms of yourproductivity andmental health.CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSmaintain your system in shorter spurts around and "between thelines" of you regular day.Setting Up the SpaceYou'll need a physical location to serve as a central cockpit of con-trol. If you already have a desk and office space set up where youwork, that's probably the best place to start. If you work from ahome office, obviously that will be your prime location. If youalready have both, you'll want to establish identical, even inter-changeable systems in both places.The basics for a work space are just a writing surface androom for an in-basket. Some people, such as a foreman in amachine shop, an intake nurse on a hospital floor, or your chil-dren's nanny, won't need much more than that. The writing sur-face will of course expand for most professionals, to include aphone, a computer, stacking trays, working file drawers, referenceshelves. Some may feel the need for a fax, a printer, a VCR, and/or multimedia conferencing equipment. The seriously s e l f -contained will also want gear for exercise, leisure, and hobbies.A functional work space is critical. If you don't already have adedicated work space and in-basket, get them now. That goes forstudents, homemakers, and retirees, too. Everyone must have aphysical locus of control from which to deal with everything else.If I had to set up an emergency workstation in just a  f e wminutes, I would buy a door, put it on top of two two-drawer fil-ing cabinets (one at each end), place three stack-baskets on it, andadd a legal pad and pen. That would be my home base (if I hadtime to sit down, I'd also buy a stool!). Believe it or not, I've beenin several executive offices that wouldn't be as functional.If You Go to an Office, You'll Still Need a Space at HomeDon't skimp on work space at home. As you'll discover throughthis process, it's critical that you have at least a satellite home89PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOsystem identical to the one in your office. Many peo-ple I've worked with have been somewhat embar-rassed by the degree of chaos that reigns in theirhomes, in contrast to their offices at work; they'vegotten tremendous value from giving themselvespermission to establish the same setup in both places.If you're like many of them, you'll find that a week-end spent setting up a home workstation can make a revolution-ary change in your ability to organize your life.An Office Space in TransitIf you move around much, as a business traveler or just as a personwith a mobile life-style, you'll also want to set up an efficientlyorganized micro-office-in-transit. More than likely this will con-sist of a briefcase, pack, or satchel with appropriate folders andportable workstation supplies.Many people lose opportunities to be productive becausethey're not equipped to take advantage of the odd moments andwindows of time that open up as they move from one place toanother, or when they're in off-site environments. The combina-tion of a good processing style, the right tools, and good intercon-nected systems at home and at work can make traveling a highlyleveraged way to get certain kinds of work done.Don't Share Space!It is imperative that you have your own work space—or at least yourown in-basket and a physical place in which to process paper. Toomany married couples I've worked with have tried to work out of asingle desk at home, and it always makes light-years of differencewhen they expand to two workstations. Far from being the "separa-tion" they expect, the move in fact relieves them of a subtle stress intheir relationship about managing the stuff of their shared lives.One couple even decided to set up an additional mini-workstationin the kitchen for the stay-at-home mom, so she could processwork while keeping an eye on their infant in the family room.90You must have afocused workspace— at home,atwork, and ifpossible even inCHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSSome organizations are interested in the concept of " h ot e l -ing"—that is, having people create totally self-contained andmobile workstation capabilities so they can "plug in" anywhere inthe company, at any time, and work from there. I have my doubtsabout how well that concept will work in practice. A friend whowas involved in setting up an "office of the future" model in Wash-ington, D.C., for the U.S. government, claimed that h o t e l i n gtended to fall apart because of the "Mine!" factor—people wantedtheir own stuff. I suggest there's a deeper reason for the failure: thereneeds to be zero resistance at the less-than-conscious level for us touse the systems we have. Having to continually reinvent o u r  i n -basket, our filing system, and how and where we process our stuffcan only be a source of incessant distraction.You can work virtually everywhere if you have aclean, compact system and know how to process yourstuff rapidly and portably. But you'll still need a"home base" with a well-grooved set of tools andsufficient space for all the reference and supportmaterial that you'll want somewhere close at handwhen you "land." Most people I work with need atleast four file drawers for their general-reference and project-support types of paper-based materials—and it's hard to imaginethat all of that could ever be totally and easily movable.Getting the Tools You'll NeedIf you're committed to a full implementation of this workflowprocess, there are some basic supplies and equipment that you'llneed to get you started. As you go along, you're likely to dancebetween using what you're used to and evaluating the possibilitiesfor new and different gear to work with.Note that good tools don't necessarily have to be expensive.Often, on the low-tech side, the more "executive" somethinglooks, the more dysfunctional it really is.91It is critical that youhave your ownwork space. Youwant to use yoursystems, not justthink about them.92PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOThe Basic Processing ToolsLet's assume you're starting from scratch. In addition to a desktopwork space, you'll need:• Paper-holding trays (at least three)• A stack of plain letter-size paper• A pen/pencil•Post-its (3X3s)• Paper clips• Binder clips• A stapler and staples• Scotch tape• Rubber bands• An automatic labeler• File folders• A calendar• Wastebasket/recycling binsPaper-Holding TraysThese will serve as your in-basket and out-basket, with one ortwo others for work-in-progress support papers and/or your "readand review" stack. The most functional trays are the side-facingletter or legal stackable kinds, which have no "lip" on them tokeep you from sliding out a single piece of paper.Plain PaperYou'll use plain paper for the initial collection process. Believe itor not, putting one thought on one full-size sheet of paper canhave enormous value. Although most people will wind up pro-cessing their notes into some sort of list organizer, a few will actu-ally stick with the simple piece-of-paper-per-thought system. Inany case, it's important to have plenty of letter-size writing paperor tablets around to make capturing ad hoc input easy.CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSPost-its, Clips, Stapler, Etc.Post-its, clips, stapler, tape, and rubber bands willcome in handy for routing and storing paper-basedmaterials. We're not finished with paper yet (if youhaven't noticed!), and the simple tools for managingit are essential.The LabelerThe labeler is a surprisingly critical tool in our work.Thousands of executives and professionals and homemakers Ihave worked with now have their own automatic labelers, and myarchives are full of their comments, like, "Incredible—I wouldn'thave believed what a difference it makes!" The labeler will be usedto label your file folders, binder spines, and numerous otherthings.At this writing, I recommend the Brother labeler—it's themost user-friendly. Get the least expensive one that sits on a deskand has an AC adapter (so you won't have to worry about batter-ies). Also get a large supply of cassettes of label tape—black letterson white tape (instead of clear) are much easier to read and allowyou to relabel folders you might want to reuse.You can get software and printer sheets to make computer-generated labels, but I prefer the stand-alone tool. If you have towait to do your filing or labeling as a batch job, you'll most likelyresist making files for single pieces of paper, and it'll add the for-mality factor, which really puts the brakes on this system.File FoldersYou'll need plenty of file folders (get letter size if you can, legalsize if you must). You may also need an equal number ofPendaflex-style file-folder hangers, if your filing system requiresthem. Plain manila folders are fine—color-coding is a level ofcomplexity that's hardly ever worth the effort. Your general-reference filing system should just be a simple library.93Moment-to-momentcollecting, thinking,processing, andorganizing arechallenging enough;always ensure thatyou have the toolsto make them aseasy as possible.94PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOCalendarAlthough you may not need a calendar just to collect your incom-plete items, you'll certainly come up with actions that need to beput there, too. As I noted earlier, the calendar should be usednotto hold action lists but to track the "hard landscape" of thingsthathave to get done on a specific day or at a specific time.Most professionals these days already have some sort ofworking calendar system in place, ranging from pocket week-at-a-glance booklets, to loose-leaf organizers with day-, week-,month-, and year-at-a-glance options, to single-user softwareorganizers, to group-ware calendars used companywide, like Out-look or Lotus Notes.The calendar has often been the central tool that peoplerelyon to "get organized." It's certainly a critical component in man-aging particular kinds of data and reminders of the commitmentsthat relate to specific times and days. There are many remindersand some data that you will want a calendar for, but you won't bestopping there: your calendar will need to be integrated with amuch more comprehensive system that will emerge as you applythis method.You may wonder what kind of calendar would be best for youto use, and I'll discuss that in more detail in the next chapter. Fornow, just keep using the one you've got. After you develop a feelfor the whole systematic approach, you'll have a better referencepoint for deciding about graduating to a different tool.Wastebasket/Recycling BinsIf you're like most people, you're going to toss a lot more stuffthan you expect, so get ready to create a good bit of trash. Someexecutives I have coached have found it extremely useful toarrange for a large Dumpster to be parked immediately outsidetheir offices the day we work together!CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSDo You Need an Organizer?Whether or not you'll need an organizer will depend on a numberof factors. Are you already committed to using one? How do youwant to see your reminders of actions, agendas, and p r o j e c t s ?Where and how often might you need to review them? Becauseyour head is not the place in which to hold things,you'll obviously need something to manage your trig-gers externally. You could maintain everything in apurely low-tech fashion, by keeping pieces of paperin folders. Or you could even use a paper-based note-book or planner, or a digital version thereof. Or youcould even employ some combination of these.All of the low-tech gear listed in the previoussection is used for various aspects of collecting, processing, andorganizing. You'll use a tray and random paper for collecting. Asyou process your in-basket, you'll complete many less-than-two-minute actions that will require Post-its, a stapler, and paper clips.The magazines, articles, and long memos that are your longer-than-two-minute reading will go in another of the trays. Andyou'll probably have quite a bit just to file. What's left—maintain-ing a project inventory, logging calendar items and a c t i o n  a n dagenda reminders, and tracking the things you're waiting for—will require some form of lists, or reviewable groupings of similaritems.Lists can be managed simply in a low-tech way, as pieces ofpaper kept in a file folder (e.g., separate sheets/notes for each per-son you need to call in a "Calls" file), or they can be arranged in amore "mid-tech" fashion, in loose-leaf notebooks or planners (apage titled "Calls" with the names listed down the sheet). Or theycan be high-tech, digital versions of paper lists (such a "Calls"category in the "To Do" section of a Palm PDA or in MicrosoftOutlook "Tasks").In addition to holding portable reference material (e.g.,telephone/address info), most organizers are designed for managing95Once you know howto process yourstuff and what toorganize, you reallyjust need to createand manage lists.PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOlists. (Your calendar is actually a form of a list—with time- andday-specific action reminders listed chronologically.) Probablythousands of types of organizers have been on the market since the1980s, from the early rash of pocket Day-Timers to the currentflood of high-tech personal digital assistants (PDAs) and PC-based software products like Microsoft Outlook and Lotus Notes.Should you implement the Getting Things Doneprocess into what you're currently using, or shouldyou install something new? The answer is, dowhichever one will actually help you change yourbehavior so you'll use the tools appropriately. Thereare efficiency factors to consider here, too. Do youget a lot of digital information that would be easier totrack with a digital tool? Do you need a paper-basedcalendar for all the appointments you have to makeand change rapidly on the run? Do you need reminders of thingslike calls you have to make when it's not easy to carry file folders?And so on. There are also the aesthetic and enjoyment factors.I've done some of my best planning and updating for myself whenI simply wanted some excuse to use (i.e., play with) my Palmorganizer while waiting for dinner in a restaurant!When considering whether to get and use an organizer, andif so, which one, keep in mind that all you really need to do ismanage lists. You've got to be able to create a list on the run andreview it easily and as regularly as you need to. Once you knowwhat to put on the lists, and how to use them, the medium reallydoesn't matter. Just go for simplicity, speed, and fun.The Critical Factor of a Filing SystemA simple and highly functional personal referencesystem is critical to this process. The filing system athand is the first thing I assess before beginning theworkflow process in anyone's office. As I noted inchapter 2, the lack of a good general-reference sys-tem can be one of the greatest obstacles to imple-96One of the besttricks for enhancingyour personalproductivity ishaving organizingtools that you loveto use.
If your filing systemisn't fast, functional,and fun, you'll resistthe whole process.CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSmenting a personal management system, and for most of the execu-tives I have personally coached, it represents one of the biggestopportunities for improvement. Many times I have driven to thelocal office-supply store with a client and bought a filing cabinet,a big stock of file folders, and a labeler, just so we could create anappropriate place in which to put two-thirds of the "stuff" lyingaround his/her desk and credenza and even on the office floors.We're concerned here mostly with general-reference filing—as distinct from discrete filing systems devoted to contracts, finan-cial information, or other categories of data that deserve theirown place and indexing. General-reference files should hold arti-cles, brochures, pieces of paper, notes, printouts, faxes—basicallyanything that you want to keep for its interesting or useful dataand that doesn't fit into your specialized filing systems and won'tstand up by itself on a shelf (as will large software manuals andseminar binders).If you have a trusted secretary or assistant who maintainsthat system for you, so you can put a "File as X" Post-it on thedocument and send it "out" to him or her, great. But ask yourself ifyou still have some personally interesting or confidential supportmaterial that should be accessible at any moment, even when yourassistant isn't around. If so, you'll still need your own system,either in your desk or right beside it somewhere.Success Factors for FilingI strongly suggest that you maintain your own personal, at-handfiling system. It should take you less than one minute to picksomething up out of your in-basket or print it from e-mail, decideit needs no action but has some potential future value, and finishstoring it in a trusted system. If it takes you longer than a minuteto complete that sequence of actions, you have a significantimprovement opportunity, since you probably won't file the docu-ment; you'll stack it or stuff it instead. Besides being fast, the sys-tem needs to be fun and easy, current and complete. Otherwiseyou'll unconsciously resist emptying your in-basket because you9798PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOknow there's likely to be something in there that ought to get filed,and you won't even want to look at the papers. Take heart: I've seenpeople go from resisting to actually enjoying sorting through theirstacks once their personal filing system is set up and humming.You must feel equally comfortable about filing a single pieceof paper on a new topic—even a scribbled note—in its own fileasyou would about filing a more formal, larger document. Because itrequires so much work to make and organize files, people eitherdon't keep them or have junked-up cabinets and drawers full of allsorts of one-of-a-kind items, like a menu for the local take-outcafe or the current train schedule.Whatever you need to do to get your reference system to thatquick and easy standard for everything it has to hold, do it. Mysystem works wonderfully for me and for many others who try it,and I highly recommend that you consider incorporating all ofthe following guidelines to really make reference filing automatic.Keep Your General-Reference Files at Hand's Reach Filing has tobe instantaneous and easy. If you have to get up every time youhave some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, you'll tend tostack it instead of filing it, and you're also likely to just resist thewhole in-basket process (because you subconsciously know there'sstuff in there that might need filing!). Many people I havecoached have redesigned their office space so they have fourgeneral-reference file drawers literally in "swivel distance," insteadof across their room.One Alpha System I have one A—Z alphabetical filing system, notmultiple systems. People have a tendency to want to use their filesas a personal organization system, and therefore they attempt toorganize them by projects or areas of focus. This magnifies geo-metrically the number of places something isn't when you forgetwhere you filed it. One simple alpha system files everything bytopic, project, person, or company, so it can be in only three orfour places if you forget exactly where you put it. You can usuallyCHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSput at least one subset of topics on each label, like "Gardening—pots" and "Gardening—ideas." These would be filed under G.Currently I have four file drawers for my general-referencefiles, and each is clearly marked on the outside—"A-E," "F-L,"and so on—so I don't have to think about where something goesonce it's labeled.Every once in a while someone has such a huge amount ofreference material on one topic or project that it should be put inits own discrete drawer or cabinet. But if it is less than a half a filedrawer's worth, I recommended including it in the single generalalphabetical system.Have Lots of Fresh Folders I keep a giant stack of fresh, new filefolders instantly at hand and reachable from where I sit to processmy in-basket. Nothing is worse than having something to file andnot having an abundance of folders to grab from to make theprocess easy. At any given time I want to have an inventory ofalmost half a file drawer full of unused or reusable folders. Rule ofthumb: reorder when the number drops below a hundred.Keep the Drawer Less Than Three-Quarters Full Always try tokeep your file drawers less than three-quarters full. If they'restuffed, you'll unconsciously resist putting things in there, and ref-erence materials will tend to stack up instead. If a drawer is start-ing to get tight, I may purge it while I'm on hold on the phone.I know almost no one who doesn't have overstuffed filedrawers. If you value your cuticles, and if you want to get rid of yourunconscious resistance to filing, then you must keep the drawersloose enough that you can insert and retrieve files without effort.Some people's reaction to this is "I'd have to buy more file cabi-nets!" as if that were something horrible. Help me out here. If thestuff is worth keeping, it's worth keeping so that it's easily accessible,right? And if it's not, then why are you keeping it? It's said that we'rein the Information Age; if there's any validity to that, and if you'redoing anything that hinders your usage of it... not smart.99100PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOYou may need to create another tier of reference storage togive yourself sufficient working room with your general-referencefiles at hand. Material such as finished project notes and "dead"client files may still need to be kept, but can be stored off-site or atleast out of your work space.Label Your File Folders with an Auto Labeler Typeset labels changethe nature of your files and your relationship to them. Labeled filesfeel comfortable on a boardroom table; everyone can identify them;you can easily see what they are from a distance and in your brief-case; and when you open your file drawers, you get to see what looksalmost like a printed index of your files in alphabetical order. Itmakes it fun to open the drawer to find or insert things.Perhaps later in this new millennium the brain scientists willgive us some esoteric and complex neurological explanation for whylabeled files work so effectively. Until then, trust me. Get a labeler.And get your own. To make the whole system work without a hitch,you'll need to have it at hand all the time, so you can file somethingwhenever you want. And don't share! If you have something to fileand your labeler's not there, you'll just stack the material instead offiling it. The labeler should be as basic a tool as your stapler.Get High-Quality Mechanics File cabinets are not the place toskimp on quality. Nothing is worse than trying to open a heavyfile drawer and hearing that awful screech! that happens when youwrestle with the roller bearings on one of those $29.95 "specialsale" cabinets. You really need a file cabinet whose drawer, evenwhen it's three-quarters full, will glide open and click shut withthe smoothness and solidity of a door on a German car. I'm notkidding.Get Rid of Hanging Files If You Can At the risk of seriouslyoffending a lot of people who are already using hanging files, Irecommend that you totally do away with the hanging-file hard-ware and use just plain folders standing up by themselves in theCHAPTER 4 |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSfile drawer, held up by the movable metal plate in the back. Hang-ing folders are much less efficient because of the effort it takes tomake a new file ad hoc and the formality that imposes on the fil-ing system.Here's an e-mail I received recently from a senior managerwho actually took my advice after avoiding it for a couple of yearsbecause of his investment in the hanging hardware:Your system is FANTASTIC!! I've completely redone my files athome and at work—it only took a combined four days to do it,but I've done away with Pendaflex and have gone to the manilafolder system, with A-Z and nothing else. WOW! It's so mucheasier. My desk for some reason is a lot neater, too, without thosestacks of "to be filed" stuff hanging around!But If You Can't... M a n y  p e o p l e  a r e  s t u c k  w i t hthe hanging-file system, at least at work, becauseside-opening hanging-folder filing cabinets havebecome standard corporate issue. If you have to workwith hanging files, then I recommend that you:• Label the files, not the hangers. That lets you carrythe file folders for meetings and when traveling,without taking the hanger.In the fire zone ofreal work, if it takeslonger than sixtyseconds to filesomething, youwon't file, you'llstack.• Use only one file folder per hanger. This will keep the drawer visu-ally neat and prevent the weirdness that results when multiplefiles make a hanger uneven. Having to recalibrate files in analpha system every time a folder gets full is too much trouble.• Keep a big supply of plain hangers and new file folders in thefront of your first file drawer so you can make new files and storethem in a flash.101102PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOPurge Your Files at Least Once a Year Cleaning house in your filesregularly keeps them from going stale and seeming like a blackhole, and it also gives you the freedom to keep anything on awhim "in case you might need it." You know everything will bereassessed within a few months anyway, and you can redecidethen what's worth keeping and what isn't. As I say, I purge myfiles while I'm on hold on the phone (or marking time on a con-ference call that's dragging on and on!).I recommend that all organizations (if they don't have onealready) establish a Dumpster Day, when all employees get tocome to work in sneakers and jeans, put their phones on do-not-disturb, and get current with all their stored stuff.* Dumpsters arebrought in, and everyone has permission to spend the whole dayin purge mode. A personal Dumpster Day is an ideal thing to putinto your tickler file, either during the holidays, at year's end, oraround early-spring tax-preparation time, when you might wantto tie it in with archiving the previous year's financial files.One Final Thing to Prepare . . .You've blocked off some time, you've gotten a work area set up,and you've got the basic tools to start implementing the method-ology. Now what?If you've decided to commit a certain amount of time to set-ting up your workflow system, there's one more thing that you'llneed to do to make it maximally effective: you must clear thedecks of any other commitments for the duration of the session.If there's someone you absolutely need to call, or somethingyour secretary has to handle for you or you have to check withyour spouse about, do it now. Or make an agreement with your-*A great time to do this is Christmas Eve Day, or some similar near-holidaythat falls on a workday. Most people are in "party mode" anyway, so it's an idealopportunity to get funky and clean house.CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND TOOLSself about when you will do it, and then put some reminder of thatwhere you won't miss it. It's critical that your full psychic atten-tion be available for the work at hand.Almost without exception, when I sit down to begin coach-ing people, even though they've blocked out time and committedsignificant money to utilize me as a resource for that time, theystill have things they're going to have to do before we quit for theday, and they haven't arranged for them yet in their own systems."Oh, yeah, I've got to call this client back sometime today," they'llsay, or "I have to check in with my spouse to see if he's gotten thetickets for tonight." It bespeaks a certain lack of awareness andmaturity in our culture, I think, that so many sophisticated peopleare ignoring those levels of responsibility to their own psyche, onan ongoing operational basis.So have you handled all that? Good. Now it's time to gatherrepresentatives of all of your open loops into one place.
103104
Collection: Corralling Your "Stuff"IN CHAPTER 2 I described the basic procedures for collecting your work.This chapter will lead you in more detail through the process ofgetting all your incompletes, all your "stuff," into one place—into"in." That's the critical first step in getting to the state of "mind likewater." Just gathering a few more things than you currently havewill probably create a positive feeling for you. But if you can hang inthere and really do the whole collection process, 100 percent, it willchange your experience dramatically and give you an im porta ntnew reference point for being on top of your work.When I coach a client through this process, the collectionphase usually takes between one and six hours, though it did takeall of twenty hours with one person (finally I told him, "You getthe idea"). It can take longer than you think if you are committedto a full-blown capture that will include everything at work andeverywhere else. That means going through every storage areaand every nook and cranny in every location, including cars,boats, and other homes, if you have them.Be assured that if you give yourself at least a couple of hoursto tackle this part, you can grab the major portion of things out-standing. And you can even capture the rest by creating relevantplaceholding notes—for example, "Purge and process boat stor-age shed" and "Deal with hall closet."In the real world, you probably won't be able to keep yourstuff 100 percent collected all of the time. If you're like most peo-ple, you'll move too fast and be engaged in too many things dur-CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"ing the course of a week to get all your ideas and commitmentscaptured outside your head. But it should become an ideal stan-dard that keeps you motivated to consistently "clean house" of allthe things about your work and life that have your attention.Ready, Set. . .There are very practical reasons to gather everything before youstart processing it:1|    i t ' s  h e l p f u l  t o  h a v e  a  s e n s e  o f  t h e  v o l u m e  o f  stuff you have todeal with;2 |   it lets you know where the "end of the tunnel" is; and3 |   when you're processing and organizing, you don't want to bedistracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuffthat might still be "somewhere." Once you have all the thingsthat require your attention gathered in one place, you'll auto-matically be operating from a state of enhanced focus andcontrol.It can be daunting to capture into one location, at one time,all the things that don't belong where they are. It may even seem alittle counterintuitive, because for the most part, most of that stuffwas not, and is not, "that important"; that's why it's still lyingaround. It wasn't an urgent thing when it first showed up, andprobably nothing's blown up yet because it hasn't been dealt with.It's the business card you put in your wallet of somebody youthought you might want to contact sometime. It's the little pieceof techno-gear in the bottom desk drawer that you're missing apart for. It's the printer that you keep telling yourself you're goingto move to a better location in your office. These are the kinds ofthings that nag at you but that you haven't decided either to dealwith or to drop entirely from your list of open loops. But becauseyou think there still could be something important in there, that105PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO"stuff" is controlling you and taking up more psychic energy than itdeserves. Keep in mind, you can feel good about what you're notdoing, only when you know what you're not doing.So it's time to begin. Grab your in-basket and a half-inchstack of plain paper for your notes, and let's . . .... G o !Physical GatheringThe first activity is to search your physical environ-ment for anything that doesn't belong where it is, theway it is, permanently, and put it into your in-basket.You'll be gathering things that are incomplete, thingsthat have some decision about potential action tiedto them. They all go into "in," so they'll be availablefor later processing.
106What Stays Where It IsThe best way to create a clean decision about whether somethingshould go into the in-basket is to understand clearly what shouldn'tgo in. Here are the four categories of things that can remainwhere they are, the way they are, with no action tied to them:• Supplies• Reference material• Decoration• EquipmentSupplies . . . include anything you need to keep because you useit regularly. Stationery, business cards, stamps, staples, Post-itpads, legal pads, paper clips, ballpoint refills, batteries, forms youneed to fill out from time to time, rubber bands—all of thesequalify. Many people also have a "personal supplies" drawer atwork containing dental floss, Kleenex, breath mints, and so on.Train yourself tonotice and collectanything thatdoesn't belongwhere it is forever.CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"Reference Material ... i s  a n y t h i n g  y o u  s i m p l y  k e e p  f o r  i n f o r m a -tion as needed, such as manuals for your software, the local take-out deli menu, or your kid's soccer schedule. This categoryincludes your telephone and address information, any materialrelevant to projects, themes, and topics, and sources such as dic-tionaries, encyclopedias, and almanacs.Decoration . . . means pictures of family, artwork, and fun andinspiring things pinned to your bulletin board. You also mighthave plaques, mementos, and/or plants.Equipment ... is obviously the telephone, computer, fax, printer,wastebasket, furniture, and/or VCR.You no doubt have a lot of things that fall into these four catego-ries—basically all your tools and your gear, which have noactionstied to them. Everything else goes into "in." But many of thethings you might initially interpret as supplies, reference, decora-tion, or equipment could also have action associated with thembecause they still aren't exactly the way they need to be.For instance, most people have, in their desk drawers and ontheir credenzas and bulletin boards, a lot of reference materialsthat either are out of date or need to be organized somewhereelse. Those should go into "in." Likewise, if your supplies draweris out of control, full of lots of dead or unorganized stuff, that's anincomplete that needs to be captured. Are the photos of your kidscurrent ones? Is the artwork what you want on the wall? Are themementos really something you still want to keep? Is the furni-ture precisely the way it should be? Is the computer set up the wayyou want it? Are the plants in your office alive? In other words,supplies, reference materials, decoration, and equipment mayneed to be tossed into the in-basket if they're not just where theyshould be, the way they should be.107108PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOIssues About CollectingAs you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one ormore of the following:• you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-basket;• you're likely to get derailed into purging and organizing;• you may have some form of stuff already collected andorganized; and/or• you're likely to run across some critical things that you want tokeep in front of you.What If an Item Is Too Big to Go in the In-Basket? If you can'tphysically put something in the in-basket, then write a note on apiece of letter-size plain paper to represent it. For instance, if youhave a poster or other piece of artwork behind the door to youroffice, just write "Artwork behind door" on a letter-size piece ofpaper and put the paper in the in-basket.Be sure to date it, too. This has a couple of benefits. If yourorganization system winds up containing some of these pieces ofpaper representing something else, it'll be useful to know when thenote was created. It's also just a great habit to date everything youhand-write, from Post-it notes to your assistant, to voice-mails youdownload onto a pad, to notes you take on a phone call with aclient. The 3 percent of the time that this little piece of informa-tion will be extremely useful makes it worth developing the habit.What If the Pile Is Too Big to Fit into the In-Basket? If you're like98 percent of my clients, your initial gathering activity will collectmuch more than can be comfortably stacked in an in-basket. Ifthat's the case, just create stacks around the in-basket, and maybeeven on the floor underneath it. Ultimately you'll be emptying thein-stacks, as you process and organize everything. In the mean-time, though, make sure that there's some obvious visual distinc-tion between the stacks that are "in" and everything else.CHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"Instant Dumping If it's immediately evident that something istrash, go ahead and toss it when you see it. For some of my clients,this marks the first time they have ever cleaned their center deskdrawer!If you're not sure what something is or whether it's worthkeeping, go ahead and put it into "in." You'll be able to decideabout it later, when you process the in-basket. What you don'twant to do is to let yourself get wrapped up in things piece bypiece, trying to decide this or that. You'll do that later anyway ifit's in "in," and it's easier to make those kinds of choices whenyou're in processing mode. The objective for the collection processis to get everything into "in" as quickly as possible so you've appro-priately retrenched and "drawn the battle lines."Be Careful of the Purge-and-Organize Bug! Many people get hitwith the purge-and-organize virus as they're going through vari-ous areas of their office (and their home). If that happens to you,it's OK, so long as you have a major open window of time to getthrough the whole process (like at least a whole week ahead ofyou). Otherwise you'll need to break it up into chunks and cap-ture them as little projects or actions to do, with reminders in yoursystem, like "Purge four-drawer cabinet" or "Clean office closet."What you don't want to do is let yourself get caught runningdown a rabbit trail cleaning up some piece of your work and thennot be able to get through the whole action-management imple-mentation process. It may take longer than you think, and youwant to go for the gold and finish processing all your stuff and set-ting up your system as soon as possible.What About Things That Are Already on Lists and in Organizers'?You may already have some lists and some sort of organizationsystem in place. But unless you're thoroughly familiar with thisworkflow-processing model and have implemented it previously,I recommend that you treat those lists as items still to be pro-cessed, like everything else in "in." You'll want your system to be109110PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOconsistent, and it'll be necessary to evaluate everything from thesame viewpoint to get it that way."But I Can't Lose That Thing . . . !" Often in the collectionprocess someone will run across a piece of paper or a documentthat causes her to say, "Oh, my God! I forgot about that! I've got todeal with that!" It could be a phone slip with a return call she wassupposed to handle two days before, or some meeting notes thatremind her of an action she was supposed to take weeks ago. Shedoesn't want to put whatever it is into the huge stack of other stuffin her in-basket because she's afraid she might lose track of itagain.If that happens to you, first ask yourself if it's something thatreally has to be handled before you get though this initial imple-mentation time. If so, best deal with it immediately so you get itoff your mind. If not, go ahead and put it into "in." You're going toget all that processed and emptied soon anyway, so it won't belost.If you can't deal with the action in the moment, and you stilljust have to have the reminder right in front of you, go ahead andcreate an "emergency" stack somewhere close at hand. It's not anideal solution, but it'll do. Keep in mind that some potential anx-iousness is going to surface as you make your stuff more consciousto you than it's been. Create whatever supports you need.Start with Your DesktopReady now? OK. Start piling those things on your desk into "in."Often there'll be numerous things right at hand that need to gointhere. Many people use their whole desktop as "in"; if you're oneof them, you'll have several stacks around you to begin your "in"collection with. Start at one end of your work space and movearound, dealing with everything on every cubic inch. Typicalitems will be:• Stacks of mail and memos• Phone slipsCHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"• Collected business cards• Notes from meetingsResist the urge to say, as almost everyone does initially, "Well, Iknow what's in that stack, and that's where I want to leave it."That's exactly what hasn't worked before, and it all needs to gointo the in-basket.As you go around your desktop, ask yourself if you have anyintention of changing any of the tools or equipment there. Is yourphone OK? Your computer? The desk itself? If anything needschanging, write a note about it and toss it into "in."Desk DrawersNext tackle the desk drawers, if you have them, one at a time. Anyattention on anything in there? Any actionable items? Is thereanything that doesn't belong there? If the answer to any of thesequestions is yes, put the actionable item into "in" or write a noteabout it. Again, whether you use this opportunity to clean andorganize the drawers or simply make a note to do it l at er  wi l ldepend on how much time you have and how much stuff is inthere.CountertopsContinue working your way around your office, collecting every-thing sitting on the tops of credenzas or counters or cabinets thatdoesn't belong there permanently. Often there will be stacks ofreading material, mail, and miscellaneous folders and supportmaterial for actions and projects. Collect it all.Maybe there is reference material that you've already usedand just left out. If that's so, and if you can return it to the filecabinet or the bookshelf in just a second, go ahead and do that. Becareful to check with yourself, though, about whether there issome potential action tied to the material before you put it away.If there is, put it into "in" so you can deal with it later in theprocess.111PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOInside the CabinetsNow look inside the cabinets. What's in there? These are perfectareas for stashing large supplies and reference materials, andequally seductive for holding deeper levels of stuff.Any broken or out-of-date things in there? Often I'llfind collectibles and nostalgia that aren't meaningfulto my clients any longer. One general manager of aninsurance office, for example, wound up tossing outat least a small Dumpster's worth of "recognition"awards he had accumulated over the years.Again, if some of these areas are out of control and needpurging and organizing, write that on a note and toss it into "in."Floors, Walls, and ShelvesAnything on bulletin boards that needs action? Anything tackedonto the walls that doesn't belong there? Any attention on yourpictures, artwork, plaques, or decorations? How about the openshelves? Any books that need to be read or donated? Any cata-logs, manuals, or three-ring binders that are out of date or havesome potential action associated with them? Any piles or stacks ofthings on the floor? Just scoot them over next to your in-basket toadd to the inventory.Equipment, Furniture, arid FixturesIs there anything you want to do to or change about any of youroffice equipment or furniture or the physical space i t s e l f ?  D o e severything work? Do you have all the lighting you need? If there areactionable items, you know what to do: make a note and put it in "in."Other LocationsDepending on the scope of what you're addressing in this process,you may want to do some version of the same kind of gatheringanywhere else you keep stuff. If you're determined to get to areally empty head, it's imperative that you do it everywhere.112Consider whetheryour collectible andnostalgia items arestill meaningful toyou.CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"Some executives I work with find it immenselyvaluable to take me home with them and have mewalk them through this process there as well. Oftenthey've allowed the "not so important" trap to ensnarethem in their home life, and it has gnawed away attheir energy.Don't let the "notso important" trapgnaw away yourenergy at home.Mental Gathering: The Mind-SweepOnce you feel you've collected all the physical things in your envi-ronment that need processing, you'll want to collect anything elsethat may be residing in your psychic RAM. What has your atten-tion that isn't represented by something already in your in-basket?This is where the stack of plain paper really comes into play.I recommend that you write out each thought, each idea, eachproject or thing that has your attention, on a separate sheet of paper.You could make one long list on a pad, but given how you willlater be processing each item individually, it's actually more effec-tive to put everything on separate sheets. You will likely not keepthese pieces of paper (unless you decide that low-tech is your bestorganizing method), but it'll be handy to have them as discreteitems to deal with as you're processing.It will probably take you between twenty minutes and anhour to clear your head onto separate notes, after you've gatheredeverything else. You'll find that things will tend to occur to you insomewhat random fashion—little things, big things, personalthings, professional things, in no particular order.In this instance, go for quantity. It's much better to overdothis process than to risk missing something. You can always tossthe junk later. Your first idea may be "Save the ozone layer," andthen you'll think, "I need cat food!" Grab them all. Don't be sur-prised if you discover you've created quite a stack of paper in "in"during this procedure.113PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO"Trigger" ListTo assist in clearing your head, you may want to review thefollowing "Incompletion Triggers" list, item by item, to see ifyou've forgotten anything. Often you'll just need a jog to unearthsomething lurking in a corner of your mind. Remember, whensomething occurs to you, write it on a piece of paper and toss itinto "in.""Incompletion Triggers" ListProfessionalProjects started, not completedProjects that need to be startedCommitments/promises to othersBoss/partnersColleaguesSubordinatesOther people in organization"Outside" peopleCustomersOther organizationsProfessionalsCommunications to make/get     ,Internal/ExternalInitiate or respond to:Phone callsVoice-mailE-mailPagesFaxesLettersMemosOther writing to finish/submitReportsEvaluations/reviewsProposalsArticlesPromotional materialsManuals/instructionsRewrites and editsMeetings that need to be set/requestedWho needs to know about whatdecisions?Significant read/reviewFinancialCash flowStatisticsBudgetsForecasts/projectionsP&LsBalance sheetCredit linePlanning/organizingFormal planning (goals, targets,objectives)Current projects (next stages)Upcoming projects114CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"Business/marketing plansOrganizational initiativesUpcoming eventsMeetingsPresentationsOrganizational structuringChanges in facilitiesInstallation of new systems/equipmentTravelBanksReceivablesPayablesPetty cashAdministrationLegal issuesInsurancePersonnelPolicies/proceduresCustomersInternalExternalMarketingPromotionSalesCustomer serviceSystemsPhonesComputersOffice equipmentOther equipmentUtilitiesFilingStorageInventoriesSuppliesOffice/siteOffice organization, FurnitureDecorationsWaiting for...InformationDelegated tasks/projectsCompletions critical to projectsReplies to:LettersMemosCallsProposalsRequisitionsReimbursementsPetty cashInsuranceOrdered itemsItems being repairedTicketsDecisions of othersProfessional developmentTraining/seminarsThings to learnThings to look upSkills to practice/learn especially re:computersTape/video trainingResumesOutside educationResearch— need to find out about...Professional wardrobe115PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOPersonalProjects started, not completedProjects that need to be startedCommitments/promises to othersSpouseChildrenFamilyFriendsProfessionalsBorrowed itemsProjects: other organizationsServiceCivicVolunteerCommunications to make/getFamilyFriendsProfessionalInitiate or respond to:Phone callsLettersCardsUpcoming eventsSpecial occasionsBirthdaysAnniversariesWeddingsGraduationsHolidays  .TravelWeekend tripsVacationsSocial eventsCultural eventsSporting eventsR&D— things to doPlaces to goPeople to meet/inviteLocal attractionsAdministrationFinancialBillsBanksInvestmentsLoansTaxesInsuranceLegal affairsFilingWaiting for. . .Mail orderRepairReimbursementsLoaned itemsMedical dataRSVPsHome/householdLandlordsProperty ownershipLegalReal estateZoningTaxesBuilders/contractorsHeating/air-conditioningPlumbingElectricityRoofingLandscape116CHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF"DrivewayWalls/floors/ceilingsDecorationFurnitureUtilitiesAppliancesLightbulbs/wiringKitchen thingsWasher/dryer/vacuumAreas to organize/cleanComputersSoftwareHardwareConnectionsCD-ROME-mail/InternetTVVCRMusic/CDs/tapesCameras/filmPhonesAnswering machineSports equipmentClosets/clothesGarage/storageVehicle repair/maintenanceToolsLuggagePetsHealth careDoctorsDentistsSpecialistsHobbiesBooks/records/tapes/disksErrandsHardware storeDrugstoreMarketBankCleanerStationerCommunityNeighborhoodSchoolsLocal governmentCivic issuesThe "In" InventoryIf your head is empty of everything, personally and professionally,then your in-basket is probably quite full, and likely spilling over.In addition to the paper-based and physical items in your in-basket, your inventory of "in" should include any resident voice-mails and all the e-mails that are currently staged in the "in" areaof your communication software. It should also include any items117PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOon your organizer lists for which you have not yet determinednext actions.I usually recommend that clients downloadtheir voice-mails onto paper notes and put those intotheir in-baskets, along with their whole organizernotebooks, which usually need significant reassess-ment. If you've been using something like a PalmPDA or Microsoft Outlook or Lotus Organizer foranything other than calendar and telephone/addressfunctionality, I suggest you print out any task and t o -do lists and put them, too, into your in-basket.E-mails are best left where they are, because of their volumeand the efficiency factor of dealing with them within their ownminisystem.But "In" Doesn't Stay in "In"When you've done all that, you're ready to take the next step. Youdon't want to leave anything in "in" for an indefinite period oftime, because then it would without fail creep back into your psy-che again, since your mind would know you weren't dealing withit. Of course, one of the main factors in people's resistance to col-lecting stuff into "in" is the lack of a good processing and organiz-ing methodology to handle it.That brings us to the next chapter: "Getting 'In' to Empty."
118Connection iscompleted whenyou can easily seethe edges to theinventory ofeverything that iscomplete.Processing: Getting "In" to EmptyASSUMING THAT YOU have collected everything that has your atten-tion, your job now is to actually get to the bottom of "in." Getting"in" to empty doesn't mean actually doing all the actions andprojects that you've collected. It just means identifying each itemand deciding what it is, what it means, and what you're going todo with it.When you've finished processing "in," you will have1 |t r a s h e d  w h a t  y o u  d o n ' t  n e e d ;2 |c o m p l e t e d  a n y  l e s s - t h a n - t w o - m i n u t e  a c t i o n s ;3 |h a n d e d  o f f  t o  o t h e r s  a n y t h i n g  t h a t  c a n  b e  d e l e g a t ed;4 |s o r t e d  i n t o  y o u r  o w n  o r g a n i z i n g  s y s t e m  r e m i n d e r s  ofactions that require more than two minutes; and5|    i d e n t i f i e d  a n y  l a r g e r  c o m m i t m e n t s  ( p r o j e c t s )  you now have,based on the input.To get an overview of this process, you may find it usefulhere to refer to the Workflow Diagram on page 120. The centercolumn illustrates all the steps involved in processing and decid-ing your next actions.This chapter focuses on the components in the diagram'scenter column, the steps from "in" to next action. You'll immedi-ately see the natural organization that results from following thisprocess for each of your open loops. For instance, if you pick upsomething from "in" and realize, "I've got to call Andrea about119120PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOWORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING
CHAPTER 6  I  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYthat, but I've got to do it on Monday, when she's in her office,"then you'll defer that action immediately and enter it into yourcalendar for Monday.I recommend that you read through this chapter and thenext one, on organizing your actions, before you actually startprocessing what you've collected in "in." It may save you somesteps. When I coach clients through this process, it invariablybecomes a dance back and forth between the simple decision-making stage of processing the open loops and the trickier task offiguring out the best way to enter these decisions in a client's par-ticular organization system.Many of my coaching clients, for example, are eager toget set up personally on a PDA organizer that will synchro-nize with Microsoft Outlook, which their company is using fore-mail and scheduling. The first thing we have to do (afterwe've collected the in-basket) is make sure all their hardwareand software are working. Then we clean up (print out anderase, usually) everything they have previously tried to organizein their Outlook task lists and put it all into "in." Then we estab-lish some working categories such as "Calls," "Errands," "Agen-das," "At Computer," and so on. As we begin to process thein-basket, the client can go immediately to his computer andtype his action steps directly into the system he will ultimatelydepend on.If you're not sure yet what you're going to be using as a per-sonal reminder system, don't worry. You can begin very appropri-ately with the low-tech initial process of notes on pieces of paper.You can always upgrade your tools later, once you have your sys-tem in place.Processing GuidelinesThe best way to learn this model is by doing. But there are a fewbasic rules to follow:121PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO• Process the top item first.• Process one item at a time.• Never put anything back into "in."Top Item FirstEven if the second item down is a personal note to you from thepresident of your country, and the top item is a piece of junk mail,you've got to process the junk mail first! That's anexaggeration to make a point, but the principle is animportant one: everything gets processed equally.The verb "process" does not mean "spend time on." Itjust means "decide what the thing is and what actionis required, and then dispatch it accordingly." You're going to getto the bottom of the basket as soon as you can anyway, and youdon't want to avoid dealing with anything in there.Emergency Scanning Is Not ProcessingMost people get to their in-basket or their e-mail and look for themost urgent, most fun, or most interesting stuff to deal with first."Emergency scanning" is fine and necessary sometimes (I doit, too). Maybe you've just come back from an off-site meetingand have to be on a long conference call in fifteen minutes. Soyou check to make sure there are no land mines about to explodeand to see if your client has e-mailed you back OK'ing the bigproposal.But that's not processing your in-basket; it's emergencyscanning. When you're in processing mode, you must get into thehabit of starting at one end and just cranking through items oneat a time, in order. As soon as you break that rule, and process onlywhat you feel like processing, and in whatever order, you'll invari-ably begin to leave things unprocessed. Then you will no longerhave a functioning funnel, and it will back up all over your deskand office.122Process doesnot mean "spendtime on."CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYLIFOorFIFO?Theoretically, you should flip your in-basket upside down andprocess first the first thing that came in. As long as you go fromone end clear through to the other within a reasonable period oftime, though, it won't make much difference. You'regoing to see it all in short order anyway. And if you'regoing to attempt to clear up a big backlog of e-mailsstaged in "in," you'll actually discover it's more effi-cient to process the last-in first because of all the dis-cussion  threads  that  accumulate  on  top  of oneanother.One Item at a TimeYou may find you have a tendency, while processing your in-basket, to pick something up, not know exactly what you want todo about it, and then let your eyes wander onto another item far-ther down the stack and get engaged with it. That item may bemore attractive to your psyche because you know right away whatto do with it—and you don't feel like thinking about what's inyour hand. This is dangerous territory. What's in your hand islikely to land on a "hmppphhh" stack on the side of your deskbecause you become distracted by something easier, more impor-tant, or more interesting below it.Most people also want to take a whole stack of things out ofthe in-basket at once, put it right in front of them, and try tocrank through it. Although I empathize with the desire to "dealwith a big chunk," I constantly remind clients to put back every-thing but the one item on top. The focus on just one thing forcesthe requisite attention and decision-making to get through allyour stuff. And if you get interrupted (which is likely), you won'thave umpteen parts of "in" scattered around outside the tray andout of control again.123The in-basket is aprocessing station,not a storage bin.124PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOThe Multitasking ExceptionThere's a subtle exception to the one-item-at-a-time rule. Somepersonality types really need to shift their focus away from some-thing for at least a minute in order to make a decision about it.When I see this going on with someone, I let him take two orsometimes three things out at once as he's processing. It's theneasier and faster for him to make a choice about the actionrequired.Remember, multitasking is an exception—and it worksonlyif you hold to the discipline of working through every item inshort order, and never avoid any decision for longer than a minuteor two.Nothing Goes Back into "In"There's a one-way path out of "in." This is actually what wasmeant by the old admonition to "handle things once," thoughhandling things just once is in fact a bad idea. If you did that,you'd never have a list, because you would finish everything assoon as you saw it. You'd also be highly ineffective and inefficient,since most things you deal with are not to be acted upon the firsttime you become aware of them. Where the advice does hold is ineliminating the bad habit of continually picking things up out of"in," not deciding what they mean or what you're going to doabout them, and then just leaving them there. A better admoni-tion would be, "The first time you pick something up from yourin-basket, decide what to do about it and where it goes. Never putit back in "in."The Key Processing Question:"What's the Next Action?"You've got the message. You're going to deal with one item at atime. And you're going to make a firm next-action decision aboutCHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYeach one. This may sound easy—and it is—butitrequires you to do some fast, hard thinking. Much ofthe time the action will not be self-evident; it willneed to be determined.On that first item, for example, do you need tocall someone? Fill something out? Get informationfrom the Web? Buy something at the store? Talk toyour secretary? E-mail your boss? What? If there's anaction, its specific nature will determine the next setof options. But what if you say, "There's really noth-ing to do with this"?I am rather like amosquito in anudist camp; Iknow what I wantto do, but I don'tknow where tobegin.—Stephen BayneWhat If There Is No Action?It's likely that a portion of your in-basket will require no action.There will be three types of things in this category:• Trash• Items to incubate• Reference materialTrashIf you've been following my suggestions, you'll no doubt alreadyhave tossed out a big pile of stuff. It's also likely that you will haveput stacks of material into "in" that include things you don't needanymore. So don't be surprised if there's still a lot more to throwaway as you process your stuff.Processing all the things in your world will make you moreconscious of what you are going to do and what you should not bedoing. One director of a foundation I worked with discovered thathe had allowed way too many e-mails (thousands!) to accumulate—e-mails that in fact he wasn't ever going to respond to anyway. Hetold me that using my method forced him to "go on a healthydiet" about what he would allow to hang around his world as anincompletion.It's likely that at some point you'll come up against the question125126PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOof whether or not to keep something for future reference. I havetwo ways of dealing with that:• When in doubt, throw it out.• When in doubt, keep it.Take your pick. I think either approach is fine. You just need totrust your intuition and be realistic about your space. Most peoplehave some angst about all of this because their systems have neverreally been totally functional and clear-edged before. If you makea clean distinction between what's reference and supplies andwhat requires action, and if your reference system is simple andworkable, you can easily keep as much material as you can accom-modate. Since no action is required on it, it's just a matter ofphysical space and logistics.Filing experts can offer you more detailed guidelines aboutall this, and your CPA can provide record-retention t im et abl esthat will tell you how long you should keep what kinds of docu-mentation. My suggestion is that you make the distinction aboutwhether something is actionable or not. Once it's clear that noaction is needed, there's room for lots of options.IncubateThere will probably be things in your in-basket about which youwill say to yourself, "There's nothing to do on this now, but theremight be later." Examples of this would be:• A flier announcing a chamber of commerce breakfast with aguest speaker you might want to hear, but it's two weeks away,and you're not sure yet if you'll be at home then or out of townon a business trip.• An agenda for a board meeting you've been invited to attend inthree weeks. No action is required on it, other than your briefingyourself a day ahead of the meeting by reading the agenda.CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY• An advertisement for the next Quicken software upgrade foryour personal finances. Do you really need this next version?You don't know .. . you'd rather sleep on it for another week.• An idea you had about something you might want to do fornext year's annual sales meeting. There's nothing to do on thisnow, but you'd like to be reminded when the time comes tostart planning for it.•A  n o t e  t o  y o u r s e l f  a b o u t  t a k i n g  a  w a t e r c o l o r  c l a s s, which youhave zero time for right now.What do you do with these kinds of things? There are twooptions that could work:• Write them on a "Someday/Maybe" list.• Put them on your calendar or in a "tickler" file.The point of all of these incubation procedures is that theygive you a way to get the items off your mind right now and letyou feel confident that some reminder of the possible action willresurface at an appropriate time. I'll elaborate on these in moredetail in the next chapter, on organizing. For now, just put a Post-it on such items, and label them "maybe" or "remind on Octo-ber 17," and set them aside in a "pending" category you will beaccumulating for later sorting.*ReferenceMany of the things you will uncover in "in" will need no action butmay have value as potentially useful information about projects*One of your extra stack baskets is ideal for this purpose. Use it temporarilyduring this initial processing to gather things to organize later. Afterward youcan use it to hold pending work-in-progress papers and physical reminders ofnext actions.127128PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO4ftand topics. Ideally, you have already set up a workable filing system(as described in chapter 4) for your reference and support infor-mation. As you come across material in your in-basket and e-mailthat you'd like to keep for archival or support purposes, file it.You'll probably discover that there are lots of miscellaneouskinds of things that you want to keep but have piled up in stacksor stuffed into drawers because your reference system was too for-mal or just plain nonexistent. Let me remind you here that a less-than-sixty-second, fun-to-use general-reference filing systemwithin arm's reach of where you sit is a mission-critical compo-nent of full implementation of this methodology. In the "battlezone" of real life, if it's not easy, fast, and fun to file, you'll stackinstead of organizing. And then it will become much more diffi-cult to keep things processed.Whenever you come across something you want to keep,make a label for it, put it in a file folder, and tuck that into your fil-ing drawer. Or put a Post-it on it instructing your secretary orassistant to do the same. In my early days of coaching I used togive my clients permission to keep a "To File" pile. No longer. Idiscovered that if you can't get it into your system immediately,you're probably not ever going to. If you won't do it now, youlikely won't do it later, either.And If There Is an Action . . . What Is It?This is the biggie. If there's something that needs to be doneabout the item in "in," then you need to decide what exactlythat next action is. "Next Actions" again, means the next physical,visible activity that would be required to move the situation towardclosure.This is both easier and more difficult than it sounds.The next action should be easy to figure out, but there areoften some quick analyses and several planning steps that haven'toccurred yet in your mind, and these have to happen before youcan determine precisely what has to happen to complete the item,even if it's a fairly simple one.CHAPTER 6 |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYLet's look at a sample list of the things that a person mighttypically have his attention on.• Clean the garage• Do my taxes•- Conference I'm going to• Bobby's birthday• Press release• Performance reviews• Management changesAlthough each of these items may seem relatively clear as atask or project, determining the next action on each one will takesome thought.•C l e a n  t h e  g a r a g e. . . Well, I just have to get in there and start. No, wait a minute,there's a big refrigerator in there that I need to get rid of first. I shouldfind out if John Patrick wants it for his camp. I should...•C a l l  J o h n  r e  r e f r i g e r a t o r  i n  g a r a g eWhat about. . .•D o  m y  t a x e s. . . but I actually cant start on them until I have my last K-lback. Can't do any thing until then. So I'm.. .•W a i t i n g  f o r  K - l  f r o m  A c m e  T r u s tAnd for the. . .•C o n f e r e n c e  I ' m  g o i n g  t o129PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO. . . I need to find out whether Sandra is going to prepare a presskit for us. I guess I need to. . .• E-mail Sandra re press kits for the conference. . . and so forth. The action steps—"Call John,""Waitingfor K-l," "E-mail Sandra"—are what need to be decided abouteverything that is actionable in your in-basket.The Action Step Needs to Be the Absolute Next Physical Thing to DoRemember that these are physical, visible activities. Many peoplethink they've determined the "next action" when they get it downto "set meeting." But that's not the next action,because it's not descriptive of physical behavior. Howdo you set a meeting? Well, it could be with a phonecall or an e-mail, but to whom? Decide. If you don'tdecide now, you'll still have to decide at some otherpoint, and what this process is designed to do is actu-ally get you to finish the thinking exercise about thisitem. If you haven't identified the next physicalaction required to kick-start it, there will be a psy-chological gap every time you think about it evenvaguely. You'll tend to resist noticing it.When you get to a phone or to your computer, you want tohave all your thinking completed so you can use the tools youhave and the location you're in to more easily get things done,having already defined what there is to do.What if you say to yourself, "Well, the next thing I need todo is decide what to do about this?" That's a tricky one. Decidingisn't really an action, because actions take time, and decidingdoesn't. There's always some physical activity thatcan be done to facilitate your decision-making.Ninety-nine percent of the time you just need moreinformation before you can make a decision. Thatadditional  information   can  come  from  external130Until you knowwhat the nextphysical action is,there's still morethinking requiredbefore anything canhappen.
Determine what youneed to do in orderto decide.CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYsources ("Call Susan to get her input on the proposal") or frominternal thinking ("Draft ideas about new reorganization").Either way, there's still a next action to be determined in order tomove the project forward.Once You Decide What the Action Step isYou have three options once you decide what the next actionreally is.• Do it (if the action takes less than two minutes).• Delegate it (if you're not the most appropriate person to do theaction).• Defer it into your organization system as an option for work todo later.Do ItIf the next action can be done in two minutes or less, do it whenyou first pick the item up. If the memo requires just a thirty-second reading and then a quick "yes"/"no"/other response on aPost-it back to the sender, do it now. If you can browse the catalogin just a minute or two to see if there might be anything of inter-est in it, browse away, and then toss it, route it, or reference it asrequired. If the next action on something is to leave a quick mes-sage on someone's voice-mail, make the call now.Even if the item is not a "high priority" one, do it now ifyou're ever going to do it at all. The rationale for the two-minuterule is that that's more or less the point where it starts takinglonger to store and track an item than to deal with it the first timeit's in your hands-—in other words, it's the efficiency cutoff. If thething's not important enough to be done, throw it away. If it is,and if you're going to do it sometime, the efficiency factor shouldcome into play.Many people find that getting into the habit of following thetwo-minute rule creates a dramatic improvement in their produc-tivity. One vice president of a large software company told me131PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOthat it gave him an additional hour a day of quality discretionarytime! He was one of those 300-e-mails-a-day high-tech execu-tives, highly focused for most of the workday onthree key initiatives. Many of those e-mails werefrom people who reported to him—and they neededhis eyes on something, his comments and OKs, inorder to move forward. But because they were not on a topic inhis rifle sights, he would just stage the e-mails in "in," to get to"later." After several thousand of them piled up, he would have togo in to work and spend whole weekends trying to catch up. Thatwould have been OK if he were twenty-six, when everything's anadrenaline rush anyway, but he was in his thirties and had youngkids. Working all weekend was no longer acceptable behavior.When I coached him we went through all 800-plus e-mails hecurrently had in "in." It turned out that a lot could be dumped,quite a few needed to be filed as reference, and many othersrequired less-than-two-minute replies that he whipped through. Ichecked with him a year later, and he was still current! He neverlet his e-mails mount up beyond a screenful anymore. He said ithad changed the nature of his division because of the dramaticdecrease in his own response time. His staff thought he was nowmade of Teflon!That's a rather dramatic testimonial, but it's an indication ofjust how critical some of these simple processing behaviors can be,especially as the volume and speed of the input increase for youpersonally.Two minutes is in fact just a guideline. If you have a longopen window of time in which to process your in-basket, you canextend the cutoff for each item to five or ten minutes. If you've gotto get to the bottom of all your input rapidly, in order to figure outhow best to use your afternoon, then you may want to shorten thetime to one minute, or even thirty seconds, so you can get througheverything a little faster.It's not a bad idea to time yourself for a few of these whileyou're becoming familiar with the process. Most clients I work132The two-minuterule is magic.CHAPTERS  |  PROCESSING: SETTING "IN" TO EMPTYwith have difficulty estimating how long two min-utes actually is, and they greatly underestimate howlong certain actions are likely to take. For instance, ifyour action is to leave someone a message, and youget the real person instead of his or her voice-mail,the call will usually take quite a bit longer than twominutes.There's nothing you really need to track aboutyour two-minute actions—you just do them. If, however, you takean action and don't finish the project with that one action, you'llneed to clarify what's next on it, and manage that according to thesame criteria. For instance, if you act to replace the cartridge inyour favorite pen and discover that you're out of cartridge refills,you'll want to decide on the next action about getting them ("Buyrefills at the store") and do, delegate, or defer it appropriately.Adhere to the two-minute rule and see how much you getdone in the process of clearing out your "in" stacks. Many peopleare amazed by how many two-minute actions are possible, oftenon some of their most critical current projects.Let me make one more observation regarding the two-minute rule, this time as it relates to your comfort with typinge-mails. If you're in a large-volume e-mail environment, you'llgreatly improve your productivity by increasing your typing speedand using the shortcut keyboard commands for your operatingsystem and your common e-mail software. Too many sophisti-cated professionals are seriously hamstrung because they still huntand peck and try to use their mouse too much. More work couldbe dispatched faster by combining the two-minute rule withimproved computer skills. I've found that many executives aren'tresisting technology, they're just resisting their keyboards!Delegate ItIf the next action is going to take longer than two minutes, askyourself, "Am I the best person to be doing it?" If not, hand it offto the appropriate party, in a systematic format.133You'll be surprisedhow many two-minute actions youcan perform evenon your mostcritical projects.134PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWODelegation is not always downstream. You may decide, "Thishas got to get over to Customer Service," or "My boss needs toput his eyes on this next," or "I need my partner's point of view onthis."A "systematic format" could be any of the following:• Send the appropriate party an e-mail.• Write a note or an overnote on paper and route the item "out"to that person.• Leave him or her a voice-mail.• Add it as an agenda item on a list for your next real-timeconversation with that person.• Talk to him or her directly, either face-to-face or by phone.Although any of these options can work, I would recom-mend them in the above order, top to bottom. E-mail is usuallythe fastest mode into the system; it provides an electronic record;and the receiver gets to deal with it at his or her convenience.Written notes are next because they too can get into the systemimmediately, and the recipient then has a physical particle to useas an organizational reminder. If you're passing on paper-basedmaterial as part of the handoff, a written communication is obvi-ously the way to go; as with e-mail, the person you hand it off tocan then deal with it on his or her own schedule. Voice-mail canbe efficient, and many professionals live by it; the downside is thattracking becomes an additional requirement for both you and therecipient, and what you say is not always what gets heard. Nextwould be saving the communication on an agenda list or in afolder for your next regular meeting with the person. Sometimesthis is necessary because of the sensitive or detailed nature of thetopic, but it then must wait to get moving until that meetingoccurs. The least preferable option would be to interrupt whatboth you and the person are doing to talk about the item. This isimmediate, but it hampers workflow for both of you and has thesame downside as voice-mail: no written record.CHAPTER 6  I  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYTracking the Handoff If you do delegate an action to someoneelse, and if you care at all whether something happens as a result,you'll need to track it. As I will walk you through i n t he  ne xtchapter, about organizing, you'll see that a significant category tomanage is "Waiting For."As you develop your own customized system, what youeventually hand off and then track could look like a list in a plan-ner, a file folder holding separate papers for each item, and/or alist categorized as "Waiting For" in your software. For now, if youdon't have a trusted system set up already, just put a note on apiece of paper—"W/F: reply from Bob"—and put that into a"Pending" stack of notes in a separate pile or tray that may resultfrom your processing.What If the Ball Is Already in Someone Else's Court? In the exam-ple cited above about waiting for the last K-l to come in so youcan do your taxes, the next action is currently on someone else'splate. In such situations you will also want to track the action as adelegated item, or as a "Waiting For." On the paper that says "Domy taxes," write something like "Waiting for K-l from AcmeTrust" and put that into your "Pending" stack.It's important that you record the date on everything youhand off to others. This, of all the categories in your personal sys-tem, is the most crucial one to keep tabs on. The few times youwill actually want to refer to that information ("But I called andordered that on March 12") will make it worth establishing this asa lifelong habit.Defer ItIt's likely that most of the next actions you determine for things in"in" will be yours to do and will take longer than two minutes tocomplete. A call you need to make to a customer; an e-mail youneed to spend a little time thinking about and drafting to yourteam; a gift you need to buy for your brother at the stationerystore; a piece of software you need to download from the Web and135136PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOtry out; a conversation you must have with your spouse about aninvestment you think you should make—all of these fit thatdescription.These actions will have to be written down somewhere andthen organized in the appropriate categories so you can accessthem when you need to. For the moment, go ahead and put Post-its on the pieces of paper in "in," with the action written on them,and add these to the "Pending" stack of papers that have beenprocessed.The "Pending" Things That Are LeftIf you follow the instructions in this chapter, you'll dump a messof things, file a bunch, do a lot of two-minute actions, and handoff a number of items to other people. You'll also wind up witha stack of items that have actions associated with them that youstill need to do—soon, someday, or on a specific date—andreminders of things you're waiting on from other people. This"Pending" group is made up of the actions you've delegated ordeferred. It is what still needs to be organized in some fashion inyour personal system, a topic I'll cover in step-by-step detailin the next chapter.Identifying the Projects You HaveThis last step in getting to the bottom of "in" requires a shift inperspective from the single-action details to the larger picture—your projects.Again, I define a "project" as any outcome you're committedto achieving that will take more than one action step to complete.If you look through an inventory of actions that you have alreadybeen generating—"Call Frank about the car alarm"; "E-mailBernadette re conference materials"—you'll no doubt recognize anumber of things that are larger than the single action you'vedefined. There's still going to be something about "car alarm" toCHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTYdo after the call to Frank, and there will still be something to han-dle about the conference after the e-mail to Bernadette.I hope you're able to see the very practical reason for definingprojects as broadly as I do: If the action step you've identified willnot complete the commitment, then you'll needsome stake in the ground to keep reminding youof actions you have pending until you have closure.You need to make a list of projects. A "Projects" listmay include anything from "Give holiday party" to"Divest the Widget product line" to "Finalize com-pensation package." The purpose of this list is not toreflect your priorities but just to ensure that you'vegot placeholders for all those open loops.Whether you draw up your "Projects" list while you're ini-tially processing your in-basket or after you've set up your actionlists doesn't really matter. It just needs to be done at some point,and it must be maintained, as it's the key driver for reviewingwhere you are and where you want to be.For now, let's make sure your organizing setup is "all sys-tems go."
137Right now youprobably havebetween thirty and ahundred projects.Organizing: Setting Up theRight BucketsHAVING A TOTAL and seamless system of organization in place givesyou tremendous power because it allows your mind to let go oflower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive focus-ing, undistracted by matters that haven't been dealtwith appropriately. But your physical organizationsystem must be better than your mental one in orderfor that to happen.In this chapter I'll lead you through the organizingsteps and tools that will be required as you process your in-basket. Asyou initially process "in," you'll create lists and groupings of thingsyou want to organize and you'll invariably think of additionalitems to include. In other words, your organization system is not' ' something that you'll necessarily create all at once, ina vacuum. It will evolve as you process your stuff andtest out whether you have put everything in the bestplace for you.The  outer  ring  of the Workflow Diagram(opposite) shows the main groupings into whichthings will go as you decide what they are and what needs to bedone about them.
138
Airtight organizationis required for yourfocus to remain onthe broader horizon.
I got it all together,but I forgot whereI put it.—CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING139
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOThe Basic CategoriesThere are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep track of and manage from an organizational perspective: • A "Projects" list • Project support material • Calendared actions and information • "Next Actions" lists• A "Waiting For" list• Reference material• A "Someday/Maybe" listThe Importance of Hard EdgesIt's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinctfrom one another. They each represent a discrete type of agree-ment we make with ourselves, and if they lose their edges andbegin to blend, much of the value of organizing will be lost.If you put reference materials in the same pile asthings you still want to read, for example, you'll gonumb to the stack. If you put items on your "NextActions" lists that really need to go on the calendar,because they have to occur on specific days, then youwon't trust your calendar and you'll continually have toreassess your action lists. If you have a project that you'renot going to be doing anything about for some time, it must go ontoyour "Someday/Maybe" list so you can relate to the "Projects" listwith the rigorous action-generating focus it needs. And if somethingyou're "Waiting For" is included on one of your action lists, you'llcontinually get bogged down by nonproductive rethinking.All You Really Need Is Lists and FoldersOnce you know what you need to keep track of (covered in theprevious chapter, on Processing), all you really need is lists and140The categories mustbe kept visually,physically, andpsychologicallyseparate.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSfolders for reference and support materials. Your lists(which, as I've indicated, could also be items in fold-ers) will keep track of projects and someday/maybes,as well as the actions you'll need to take on youractive open loops. Folders (digital or paper-based)will be required to hold your reference material andthe support information for active projects.Lots of people have been making lists for yearsbut have never found the procedure to be particularlyeffective. There's rampant skepticism about systemsas simple as the one I'm recommending. But mostlist-makers haven't put the appropriate things ontheir lists, or have left them incomplete, which has kept the liststhemselves from being very functional. Once you know what goeson the lists, however, things get much easier; then you just need away to manage them.As I've said, you shouldn't bother to create some externalstructuring of the priorities on your lists that you'll then have torearrange or rewrite as things change. Attempting to impose suchscaffolding has been a big source of frustration in many people'sorganizing. You'll be prioritizing more intuitively as you see thewhole list, against quite a number of shifting variables. The list isjust a way for you to keep track of the total inventory of activethings to which you have made a commitment, and to have thatinventory available for review.When I refer to a "list," keep in mind that I mean nothingmore than a grouping of items with some similar characteristic. Alist could look like one of three things: (1) a file folder with sepa-rate paper notes for the items within the category; (2) an actuallist on a titled piece of paper (often within a loose-leaf organizeror planner); or (3) an inventory in a software program or on adigital assistant, such as Microsoft Outlook task categories or acategory on a handheld PDA.141/ would not give afig for thesimplicity on thisside of complexity,but I would givemy life for thesimplicity on theother side ofcomplexity.—Oliver WendellHolmesPRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOOrganizing Action RemindersIf you've emptied your in-basket, you'll undoubtedly have createda stack of "Pending" reminders for yourself, representing longer-than-two-minute actions that cannot be delegated to someoneelse. You'll probably have anywhere from twenty to sixty or sev-enty or more such items. You'll also have accumulated remindersof things that you've handed off to other people, and perhapssome things that need be placed in your calendar or a "Someday/Maybe" kind of holder.You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that make senseto you so you can review them as options for work to do when youhave time. You'll also want to decide on the most appropriate wayphysically to organize those groups, whether as items in folders oron lists, either paper-based or digital.The Actions That Go on Your CalendarFor the purposes of organization, as I've said, there are two basickinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain day and/orat a particular time, and those that just need to be done as soon asyou can get to them, around your other calendared items. Calen-dared action items can be either time-specific (e.g., "4:00—5:00meet with Jim") or day-specific ("Call Rachel Tuesday to see if shegot the proposal").As you were processing your in-basket, you probably c a m eacross things that you put right into your calendar as they showedup. You may have realized that the next action ongetting a medical checkup, for example, was to calland make the appointment, and so (since the actionrequired two minutes or less) you actually did it whenit occurred to you. Writing the appointment intoyour calendar as you made it would then have beencommon sense.What many people want to do, however, based142The calendar shouldshow only the "hardlandscape" aroundwhich you do therest of your actions.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSon old habits of writing daily to-do lists, is put actions on the calen-dar that they think they'd really like to get done next Monday, say,but that then actually might not, and that might then have to betaken over to following days. Resist this impulse. You need to trustyour calendar as sacred territory, reflecting the exact hard edges ofyour day's commitments, which should be noticeable at a glancewhile you're on the run. That'll be much easier if the only things inthere are those that you absolutely have to get done on that day.When the calendar is relegated to its proper role in organizing, themajority of the actions that you need to do are left in the category of"as soon as possible, against all the other things I have to do."Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by ContextOver many years I have discovered that the best way t o  b ereminded of an "as soon as I can" action is by the particular contextrequired for that action—that is, either the tool or the location orthe person needed to complete it. For instance, if the action requiresa computer, it should go on an "At Computer" list. If your actiondemands that you be out in your car driving around (such as stop-ping by the bank or going to the hardware store), the "Errands" listwould be the appropriate place to track it. If the next step is to talkabout something face-to-face with your partner Emily, putting itinto an "Emily" folder or list makes the most sense.How discrete these categories will need to be will depend on(1) how many actions you actually have to track; and (2) howoften you change the contexts within which to do them.If you are that rare person who has only twenty-five nextactions, a single "Next Actions" list might suffice. It could includeitems as diverse as "Buy nails" and "Talk to boss about staffchanges" and "Draft ideas about off-site meeting." If, however,you have fifty or a hundred next actions pending, keeping all ofthose on one big list would make it too difficult to see what youneeded to see; each time you got any window of time to do some-thing, you'd have to do unproductive resorting. If you happened tobe on a short break at a conference, during which you might be143144PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOable to make some calls, you'd have to identify the items that werecalls among a big batch of unrelated items. When you went out todo odds and ends, you'd probably want to pick out your errandsand make another list.Another productivity factor that this kind of organizationsupports is leveraging your energy when you're in a certain mode.When you're in "phone mode," it helps to make a lot of phonecalls—just crank down your "Calls" list. When your computer is upand running and you're cruising along digitally, it's useful to get asmuch done on-line as you can without having to shift into anotherkind of activity. It takes more energy than most people realize tounhook out of one set of behaviors and get into another kind ofrhythm and tool set. And obviously, when a key person is sitting infront of you in your office, you'd be wise to have all the things youneed to talk about with him or her immediately at hand.The Most Common Categories of Action RemindersYou'll probably find that at least a few of the following commonlist headings for next actions will make sense for you:• "Calls"• "At Computer"•"Errand's"• "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous)• "At Home"• "Agendas" (for people and meetings)• "Read/Review""Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make;you can work off it as long as you have a phone available. Themore mobile you are (especially if you have a cell phone), themore useful you'll find it to have one single list of all your calls:those strange little windows of time that you wind up with whenyou're off-site or traveling—on a break or waiting for a plane,maybe—offer a perfect opportunity to work down your list. Hav-CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSing a discrete "Calls" list makes it much easier to focus and intu-itively pick the best call to make in the moment.I -suggest that you take the time to write the phone numberitself alongside each item. There are many situations in which youwould probably make the call if the number was already there infront of you but not if you had to look it up."At Computer" If you work with a computer—particularly if youmove around with a laptop or have a PC at work and another oneat home—it can be helpful to group all those actions that youneed to do when it's on and running. This will allow you to see allyour options for computer work to do, reminding you of all thee-mails you need to send, the documents you need to draft or edit,and so on.Because I fly a lot, I even maintain an "On-line" action list, separate from my "At Computer"one. When I'm on a plane, I can't easily connect tothe Web or to my server, as many actions require. Soinstead of having to rethink what I can and can't dowhenever I look at my "At Computer" list, I can trustthat none of my "At Computer" actions require that Ibe connected, which frees my mind to make choicesbased on other criteria.If you have a computer only at work, you maynot need a separate "At Computer" list; "Office Actions" maycover those actions because the office is the only place you can dothem anyway. (Similarly, if you have a computer only at home,and it's not a laptop, you may be able to put computer-specificactions on your "At Home" list.)"Errands" It makes a lot of sense to group together in one placereminders of all the things you need to do when you're "out andabout." When you know you need to get in your car and go some-where, it's great to be able to look at the list while you're on theroad. Actions like "Get stock certificates from safety-deposit box,"145Think carefullyabout where andhowyou can andcan't do whichactions, andorganize your listsaccordingly.PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO"Pick up pictures at framers," and "Buy petunias at nursery" wouldall go here.This list could, of course, be nothing more elaborate than aPost-it that you keep in your planner somewhere, or a screen in an"Errands" category of the "To Do" section on your Palm orga-nizer.It's often helpful to track sublists within individual"Errands" items. For instance, as soon as you realize you needsomething from the hardware store, you might want to make"Hardware Store" the list item and then append a sublist of all thethings you want to pick up there, as you think of them. On thelow-tech end, you could create a "Hardware Store" Post-it; onthe high-tech side, if you were using a digital list, youcould attach a "note" to "Hardware Store" on your listand input the details there.Because I travel in major metropolitan areas somuch, I keep two "Errands" lists—"Errands—Ojai"(where I live) and "Errands—Anywhere," for allthose other things I can pick up even when I'm onthe road. "T-connectors for irrigation" would go on"Errands—Ojai," but "Get dress socks" would go on "Errands—Anywhere.""Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will becertain things that you can do only there, and a list of those willbe a useful thing to have in front of you then—though obviously,ifyou have a phone and a computer in your office, and you ha ve"Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play aswell. I'd use an "Office Actions" or "At Office" list for anything thatrequired an Internet connection available only, or even most con-veniently, in the office—for example, a reminder to download alarge software program from the Web would go on this list for me."At Home" Many actions can be done only at home, and it makessense to keep a list specific to that context. I'm sure you've gotnumerous personal and around-the-house projects, and often the146We must strive toreach thatsimplicity that liesbeyondsophistication.—-John GardnerCHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSnext thing to do on them is just to do them. "Hang new print,""Organize CDs," and "Switch closets to winter clothes" would betypical items for this grouping.If you have an office at home, as I do, anything that can bedone only there goes on the "At Home" list. (If you work only athome and don't go to another office, you won't need an "OfficeActions" list at all—the "At Home" list will suffice.)"Agendas"   Invariably you'll find that many of your next actionsneed to either occur in a real-time interaction with someone or bebrought up in a committee, team, or staff meeting.You have to talk to your partner about an idea fornext year; you want to check with your spouse abouthis schedule for the spring; you need to delegate atask to your secretary that's too complicated toexplain  in  an  e-mail.  And  you  must  make  anannouncement at the Monday staff meeting aboutthe change in expense-report policies.These next actions should be put on separate"Agenda" lists for each of those people and for that meeting (assum-ing that you attend it regularly). Professionals who keep a file folderto hold all the things they need to go over with their boss alreadyuse a version of this method. If you're conscientious about deter-mining all your next actions, though, you may find that you'llneed somewhere between three and fifteen of these kinds of lists. Irecommend that separate files or lists be kept for bosses, partners,assistants, spouses, and children. You should also keep the same kindof list for your attorney, financial adviser, accountant, and/or com-puter consultant, as well as for anyone else with whom you mighthave more than one thing to go over the next time you talk on thephone.If you participate in standing meetings—staff meetings,project meetings, board meetings, committee meetings, what-ever—they, too, deserve their own files, in which you can collectthings that will need to be addressed on those occasions.147Standing meetingsand people you dealwith on an ongoingbasis may needtheir own "Agenda"lists.148PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOOften you'll want to keep a running list of things to go overwith someone you'll be interacting with only for a limited periodof time. For instance, if you have a contractor doing a significantpiece of work on your house or property, you can create a list forhim for the duration of the project. As you're walking around thesite after he's left for the day, you may notice several things youneed to talk with him about, and you'll want that list to be easy tocapture and to access as needed.Given the usefulness of this type of list, your system shouldallow you to add "Agendas" ad hoc, as needed, quickly and simply.For example, inserting a page for a person or a meeting within an"Agenda" section in a loose-leaf notebook planner takes only seconds,as does adding a dedicated "Memo" in a PDA's "Agenda" category."Read/Review" You will no doubt have discovered in your in-basket a number of things for which your next action is to read. Ihope you will have held to the two-minute rule and dispatched anumber of those quick-skim items already—tossing, filing, orrouting them forward as appropriate.To-read items that you know will demand more than twominutes of your time are usually best managed in a separate physi-cal stack-basket labeled "Read/Review." This is still a "list" by mydefinition, but one that's more efficiently dealt with by group-ing the documents and magazines themselves in a tray and/orportable folder.For many people, the "Read/Review" stack can get quitelarge. That's why it's critical that the pile be reserved only forthose longer-than-two-minute things that you actually want toread when you have time. That can be daunting enough in itself,but things get seriously out of control and psychologically numb-ing when the edges of this category are not clearly defined. Apristine delineation will at least make you conscious of the inven-tory, and if you're like most people, having some type of self-regulating mechanism will help you become more aware of whatyou want to keep and what you should just get rid of.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSIt's practical to have that stack of reading material at handand easy to grab on the run when you're on your way to a meetingthat may be late starting, a seminar that may have awindow of time when nothing is going on, or a den-tist appointment that may keep you waiting to getyour teeth cleaned. Those are all great opportunitiesto crank through that kind of reading. People whodon't have their "Read/Review" material organizedcan waste a lot of time, since life is full of weird littlewindows when it could be processed.Organizing "Waiting For"Like reminders of the actions you need to do, reminders of allthe things that you're waiting to get back from or get done byothers have to be sorted and grouped. You won't necessarily betracking discrete action steps here, but more often final deliver-ables or projects that others are responsible for, such as the ticketsyou've ordered from the theater, the scanner that's coming forthe office, the OK on the proposal from your client, and soon. When the next action on something is up to someone else,you don't need an action reminder, just a trigger about whatyou're waiting for from whom. Your role is to review that list asoften as you need to and assess whether you ought to be takingan action such as checking the status or lighting a fire under theproject.You'll probably find it works best to keep this "Waiting For"list close at hand, in the same system as your own "Next Actions"reminder lists. The responsibility for the next step may bounceback and forth many times before a project is finished. For exam-ple, you may need to make a call to a vendor to request a proposalfor a piece of work (on your "Calls" list.) Having made the call,you then wait for the vendor to get back to you with the proposal(the proposal goes to your "Waiting For" list). When the propo-sal comes in, you have to review it (it lands in your "Read/Review"stack-basket). Once you've gone over it, you send it to your boss149Those who makethe worst use oftheir time are thefirst to complain ofits shortness.—-JeandePRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOfor her approval (now it's back on your "Waiting For" list). Andso on.*You'll get a great feeling when you know that your "WaitingFor" list is the complete inventory of everything you care aboutthat other people are supposed to be doing.Using the Original Item as Its Own Action ReminderThe most efficient way to track your action reminders is to addthem to lists or folders as they occur to you. The originating trig-ger won't be needed after you have processed it. Youmight take notes in the meeting with your boss, butyou can toss those after you've pulled out any projectsand actions associated with them. While some peo-ple try to archive voice-mails that they still needto "do something about," that's not the most effec-tive way to manage the reminders embedded in them.There are some exceptions to this rule, however. Certainkinds of input will most efficiently serve as their own reminders ofrequired actions, rather than your having to write somethingabout them on a list. This is particularly true for s om e  pa pe r -based materials and some e-mails.Managing Paper-Based WorkflowSome things are their own best reminders of work to be done. Thecategory of "Read/Review" articles, publications, and documentsis the most common example. It would obviously be overkill towrite "Review Fortune magazine" on some action list when youcould just as easily toss the magazine itself into your "Read/Review" basket to act as the trigger.
150*Digital list managers (like the Palm's) or low-tech papers in separate foldershave an advantage, here over lists on paper because they let you easily move anitem from one category to another as the action changes, without your havingto rewrite anything.Keep actionablee-mails and paperseparated from allthe rest.CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSAnother example: people who find it easier to deal with billsby paying them all at one time and in one location will want tokeep their bills in a folder or stack-basket labeled "Bills to Pay"(or, more generically, "Financial to Process"). Similarly, receiptsfor expense reporting should be either dealt with at the timethey're generated or kept in their own "Receipts to Process" enve-lope or folder.*The specific nature of your work, your input, and your work-station may make it more efficient to organize other categoriesusing only the original paper itself. A customer-service profes-sional, for instance, may deal with numerous requests that showup in a standard written form, and in that case maintaining a bas-ket or file containing only those actionable items is the best way tomanage them.Whether it makes more sense to write reminders on a list orto use the originating documents in a basket or folder will dependto a great extent on logistics. Could you use those r e m i n d e r ssomewhere other than at your desk? If so, the portability of thematerial should be considered. If you couldn't possibly do thatwork anywhere but at your desk, then managing reminders of itsolely at your workstation is the better choice.Whichever option you select, the reminders should be invisibly discrete categories based upon the next action required. Ifthe next action on a service order is to make a call, it should be ina "Calls" group; if the action step is to review information andinput it into the computer, it should be labeled "At Computer."Most undermining of the effectiveness of many workflow systemsI see is the fact that all the documents of one type (e.g., servicerequests) are kept in a single tray, even though different kinds ofactions may be required on each one. One request needs a phone*This approach can be dangerous, however, if you don't put those "Bills to Pay"or "Receipts to Process" in front of your face as consistently as you should. Justhaving them "organized" isn't sufficient to get them off your mind—you've alsogot to review them appropriately.151152PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOcall, another needs data reviewed, and still another is waiting forsomeone to get back with some information—but they're allsorted together. This arrangement can cause a person's mind togo numb to the stack because of all the decisions that are stillpending about the next-action level of doing.My personal system is highly portable, with almost every-thing kept on lists, but I still maintain two categories of paper-based reminders. I travel with a "Read/Review" plastic file folderand another one labeled "Data Entry." In the latter I put anythingfor which the next action is simply to input data into my com-puter (business cards that need to get into my telephone/addresslist, quotes for my "Quotes" database, articles about restaurants Iwant to put on my "Travel—Cities" sublists, etc.).Managing E-mail-Based WorkflowLike some paper-based materials, e-mails that need action aresometimes best as their own reminders—in this case within thetracked e-mail system itself. This is especially likely to be true ifyou get a lot of e-mail and spend a lot of your work time with youre-mail software booted up. E-mails that you need to act on maythen be stored within the system instead of having their embed-ded actions written out on a list.Many of my clients have found it helpful to set up two orthree unique folders on their e-mail navigator bars. True, mostfolders in e-mail should be used for reference or archived materi-als, but it's also possible to set up a workable system that will keepyour actionable messages discretely organized, outside of the "in"area itself (which is where most people keep them).I recommend that you create one folder for any longer-than-two-minute e-mails that you need to act on (again, you should beable to dispatch many messages right off the bat by following thetwo-minute rule). The folder name should begin with a prefix let-ter or symbol so that (1) it looks different from your referencefolders and (2) it sits at the top of your folders in the navigator bar.Use something like the "@" sign in Microsoft or the dash ("-") inCHAPTER 7 |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSLotus, which sort into their systems at the top. Your resulting"FACTION" folder will hold those e-mails that you need to dosomething about.Next you can create a folder titled "@WAITING FOR,"which will show up in the same place as the "@ACTION" folder.Then, as you receive e-mails that indicate that someone is goingto do something that you care about tracking, you can drag themover into the "@WAITING FOR" file. It can also hold remindersfor anything that you delegate via e-mail: when you f o r w a r dsomething, or use e-mail to make a request or delegate an action,just save a copy into the "@WAITING FOR" file.*Some applications (such as Lotus Notes) allow you to file acopy of an e-mail into one of your folders as you send it (with a"Send and File" button). Others (e.g., Outlook) will simultane-ously save only into your universal "Sent Mail" folder. In the lattercase, what seems to work best for many is to copy ("cc" or "bcc")themselves when they delegate via e-mail, and then to pull thatcopy into their "@WAITING FOR" folder. (It's relatively easy toprogram Outlook to automatically send any e-mail that you "cc"to yourself into a designated folder, which would replicate theprocess just described.)Getting E-mail "In" to "Empty" The method detailed above willenable you to actually get everything out of your e-mail in-basket,which will be a huge boon to your clarity about and control ofyour day-to-day work. You'll reclaim "in" as "in," so anythingresiding there will be like a message on your answeringmachine—a blinking light telling you you need to process some-thing! Most people use their e-mail "in" for staging still-undecidedactionable things and reference, a practice that rapidly numbsthe mind: they know they've got to reassess everything every*Microsoft Outlook allows users to copy or move e-mails into its "Tasks" con-text, which, if organized according to my recommended categories, could workequally well.153PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOtime they glance at the screen. If you never had morethan a screenful of e-mails, this approach mightbe reasonably functional, but with the volume mostprofessionals are dealing with these days, that doesn'tapply.Again, getting "in" empty doesn't mean you'vehandled everything. It means that you've DELETED what youcould, FILED what you wanted to keep but don't need to act on,DONE the less-than-two-minute responses, and moved intoyour reminder folders all the things you're waiting for and all youractionable e-mails. Now you can open the "@ACTION" file andreview the e-mails that you've determined you need to spend timeon. Isn't that process easier to relate to than fumbling throughmultiple screens, fearing all the while that you may miss some-thing that'll blow up on you?A Caution About Dispersing Reminders of Your ActionsThere's an obvious danger in putting reminders ofthings you need to do somewhere out of sight. Thefunction of an organization system is primarily tosupply the reminders you need to see when you needto see them, so you can trust your choices about whatyou're doing (and what you're not doing). Before you leave theoffice for the day, the actionable e-mails that you still have pend-ing must be reviewed individually, just like your "Calls" or "AtComputer" lists. In essence, "@ACTION" is an extension of your"At Computer" list and should be handled in exactly the samefashion. Your paper-based "Pending" workflow must likewise beassessed like a list if the paper materials are being used as youronly reminders.Distributing action triggers in a folder, on lists, and/or in ane-mail system is perfectly OK, as long as you review all of the cate-gories to which you've entrusted your triggers equally, as required. Youdon't want things lurking in the recesses of your systems and notbeing used for their intended purpose: reminding you.154It requires muchless energy tomaintain e-mail ata zero base than ata thousand base.
"Out of sight, out ofmind" is not reallyout of mind.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSIn order to hang out with friends or take a long, aimless walkand truly have nothing on your mind, you've got to know whereall your actionable items are located, what they are, and that theywill wait. And you need to be able to do that in a few seconds,not days.Organizing Project RemindersCreating and maintaining one list of all your projects (that is,again, every commitment or desired outcome that may r e q u i r emore than one action step to complete) can be a profound experi-ence! You probably have more of them than you think. If youhaven't done so already, I recommend that initially you make a"Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to the ones you'veused for your lists of actions: it can be a category in a digital orga-nizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a single file folderlabeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or separate sheetsof paper for each one.The "Projects" List(s)The "Projects" list is not meant to hold plans or details about yourprojects themselves, nor should you try to keep it arranged by pri-ority or size or urgency—it's just a comprehensive index of youropen loops. You actually won't be working off of the "Projects" listduring your day-to-day activities; for the most part, your actionlists and any ad hoc tasks that come up will constitute your tacticalin-the-moment focus. Remember, you can't do a proj-ect, you can only do the action steps it requires.The real value of the "Projects" list lies in thecomplete review it can provide (at least once a week),allowing you to ensure that you have action stepsdefined for all of your projects, and that nothing isslipping through the cracks. A quick glance at thislist from time to time will enhance your underlying155A complete andcurrent "Projects"list is the majoroperational tool formoving from tree-hugging to forestmanagement.156PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOsense of control. You'll also know that you have an i n v e n t o r yavailable to you (and to others) whenever it seems advisable toevaluate workload(s).One List, or Subdivided?Most people find that one list is the best way to go becauseit serves as a master inventory rather than as a daily prioritiz-ing guideline. The organizing system merely provides placeholdersfor all your open loops and options so your mind can moreeasily make the necessary intuitive, moment-to-moment strategicdecisions.Frankly, it doesn't matter how many different lists of projectsyou have, so long as you look at the contents of all of them asoften as you need to, since for the most part you'll do that in onefell swoop during your Weekly Review.Some Common Ways to Subsort ProjectsThere are some situations in which it makes good sense to sub-sort a "Projects" list. Let's look at these one by one.Personal/Professional Many people feel more comfortable see-ing their lists divided up between personal and professional* projects. If you're among them, be advised that your "Personal"list will need to be reviewed as judiciously as your "Professional"one, and not just saved for weekends. Many actions on personalthings will need to be handled on weekdays, exactly like every-thing else. And often some of the greatest pressures on profes-sionals stem from the personal aspects of their lives that they areletting slip.Delegated Projects If you're a senior manager or executive, youprobably have several projects that you are directly responsible forbut have handed off to people who report to you. While youcould, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" list, it mightmake better sense to create a "Projects—Delegated" list totrackCHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSthem: your task will be simply to review the list regularly enoughto ensure that everything on it is moving along appropriately.Specific Types of Projects Some professionals have as part of theirwork several different projects of the same type, which in someinstances it maybe valuable to group together as a sublist of "Proj-ects." For example, I maintain a separate category called "Projectsto Deliver," a chronological listing of all the upcoming seminars,coaching, and consulting assignments I've committed to. Theseevents are "projects" like the rest, in that I need to keep notingwhether things are moving along on and in place for them untilthey're completed. But I find it helpful to see them all organizedon one list, in the order in which they are coming up on my calen-dar, apart from my other projects.If you are a real estate agent, sell consulting services, ordevelop proposals for a relatively small number of prospectiveclients in any profession, you will likely find it useful to see all ofyour outstanding "sales relationships in progress" in one view.This could be a separate list in your planner called "ClientProjects in Development," or if you already have file folders foreach in-progress project, it may suffice to group them all in onefile stand on your credenza. Just realize that this a p p r o a c h  w i l lwork only if it represents a complete set of all of those situa-tions that require action, and only if you review them regularlyalong with the rest of your projects, keeping them current andconscious.What About Subprojects?Some of your projects will likely have major subprojects, each ofwhich could in theory be seen as a whole project. If you're movinginto a new house, for instance, and are upgrading and changingmuch of the property, you may have a list of actionable items like"Finalize landscaping," "Renovate kitchen," "Rewire basement,"and so on, all of which could in themselves be considered separateprojects. Do you make all of this one entry on your "Projects"157PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOlist—say, "Finish new home renovations"—or do you writeupeach of the subprojects as an individual line item?Actually, it won't matter, as long as you review all the compo-nents of the project as frequently as you need to to stay produc-tive. No external tool or organizing format is going to be perfectfor sorting both horizontally across and vertically down throughall your projects; you'll still have to be aware of the whole in somecohesive way (such as via your Weekly Review). If you make thelarge project your one listing on your "Projects" list, you'll want tokeep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself as "proj-ect support material" to be reviewed when you come to that majoritem. I would recommend doing it this way if big pieces of theproject are dependent on other pieces getting done first. In thatscenario you might have subprojects with no next actions attachedto them because they are in a sense "waiting for" other things tohappen before they can move forward. For instance, you mightnot be able to start on "Renovate kitchen" until you finish "Rewirebasement." However, you might be able to proceed on "Finalizelandscaping" independent of either of the other subprojects. Youwould therefore want a next action to be continually current on"Rewire basement" and "Finalize landscaping."Don't be too concerned about which way is best. If you're not* sure, I'd vote for putting your Big Projects on the "Projects" listand holding the subpieces in your project supportmaterial, making sure to include them in yourWeekly Review, If that arrangement doesn't feelquite right, try including the active and independentsubprojects as separate entries on your master list.There's no perfect system for tracking all yourprojects and subprojects the same way. You just needto know you have projects and, if they have associatedcomponents, where to find the appropriate remindersfor them.158How you listprojects andsubprojects is up toyou; just be sureyou know where tofind all the movingparts.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSProject Support MaterialsProject support materials are not project actions, and they're notproject reminders. They're resources to support your actions andthinking about your projects.Don't Use Support Material for Reminding Typically, people usestacks of papers and thickly stuffed file folders as reminders that(1) they've got a project, and (2) they've got to do something aboutit. They're essentially making support materials serve as actionreminders. The problem is that next actions and "Waiting For"items on these projects have usually not been determined and arepsychologically still embedded in the stacks and the folders—giving them the aura of just more "stuff" that repels its (un)orga-nizer instead of attracting him or her to action. When you're onthe run, in the heat of the activities of the day, files like that arethe last thing you'll want to pick up and peruse for actions. You'llactually go numb to the files and the piles because t h e y  d o n ' tprompt you to do anything and they simply create more anxiety.If you're in this kind of situation, you must first add the proj-ect itself to your "Projects" list, as a reminder that there's an out-come to be achieved. Then the action steps and "Waiting For"items must be put onto their appropriate action reminder lists.Finally, when it's time to actually do an action, like making a call tosomeone about the project, you can pull out all the materials youthink you might need to have as support during the conversation.To reiterate, you don't want to use support materials as yourprimary reminders of what to do—that should be relegated toyour action lists. If, however, the materials contain project plansand overviews in addition to ad hoc archival and reference infor-mation, you may want to keep them a little more visibly accessiblethan you do the pure reference materials in your filing cabinet.The latter place is fine for support stuff, too, so long as you havethe discipline to pull out the file drawer and take a look at theplan every time you do your Weekly Review. If not, you're better159160PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOoff storing those kinds of project support files in a standingfile holder or a separate "Pending" stack-basket on your desk orcredenza.To return to the previous example of moving into a newhouse, you could have a folder labeled "New House" containingall the plans and details and notes about the landscaping andthe kitchen and the basement. In your Weekly Review, whenyou came to "Finish new home renovations" on your "Projects"list, you'd pull out the "New House" file and thumb through allyour notes to ensure that you weren't missing any possible nextactions. Those actions would then get done, delegated, ordeferred onto your action lists, and the folder would be refileduntil you needed it again for doing the actions or for your nextWeekly Review.Many people who interact with prospects and clientshave attempted to use client folders and/or contact-managementsoftware such as Act! to "manage the account." The problemhere is that some material is just facts or historical data thatneeds to be stored as background for when you might be able touse it, and some of what must be tracked is the actions requiredto move the relationships forward. The latter can be more ef-fectively organized within your action-lists system. Client in-formation is just that, and it can be folded into a general-referencefile on the client or stored within a client-focused library. (Iuse Act! for the single great feature it offers of allowing meto cross-reference general company information and signifi-cant interactions with key people within the company. It's justa good client-centered database.) If I need to call a client, Idon't want that reminder embedded anywhere but on my "Calls"list.Organizing Ad Hoc Project ThinkingIn chapter 3, I suggested that you will often have ideas that you'llwant to keep about projects but that are not necessarily nextactions. Those ideas fall into the broad category of "project sup-CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSport materials," and may be anything from a notion about some-thing you might want to do on your next vacation to a clarifica-tion of some major components in a project plan. These thoughtscould come as you're driving down the freeway listening to a newsstory on the radio, or reading a relevant article. Whatdo you do with that kind of material?My recommendation here is that you considerwhere you're keeping tabs on the project or topicitself, how you might add information to it in thatformat, and where you might store any more exten-sive data associated with it. Most professionals will have severaloptions for how to handle support materials, including attachingnotes to a list item, organizing digital information in e-mailand/or databases, and maintaining paper-based files and notes innotebooks.Attached Notes Most organizing software allows you to attach adigital "note" to a list or calendar entry. If you're keeping a "Proj-ects" list within the software, you can go to the project you had athought about, open or attach a "note" to it, and type in your idea.This is an excellent way to capture "back-of-the-envelope" projectthinking. If your "Projects" list is paper-based, you can attach aPost-it note next to the item on your master list or, if you're a low-tech type, on the item's separate sheet. In any case, you'll need toremember to look at the attachment when you review your proj-ect, to make use of the data.E-mail and Databases E-mails that might contain good informa-tion related to your projects can be held in a dedicated e-mail folder(just follow the instructions on pages 152-53 for "@ACTION"and call it something like "@PROJECTS"). You may also find itworthwhile, if you don't have one already, to set up a more rigor-ous kind of digital database for organizing your thinking on aproject or topic. If your company uses Lotus Notes, for example,you can create a project database either for your own private use161There is no need"ever to lose an ideaabout a project,theme, or topic.162PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOon your PC or to be shared with others in your network.* It'sworth looking into some of the other types of free-form databasesthat are on the market, too—even just for your own use. It's greatto be able to cut and paste from the Web or from e-mails and dropdata under a topic somewhere or type in your own thoughts. Besure, also, to explore the technology and tools that you alreadyhave—just learning how to use all the lists and attachments insomething like the Palm organizer may provide you with suffi-cient "back-of-the-envelope" capability.Paper-Based Files Having a separate file folder devoted to eachproject makes a lot of sense when you're accumulating paper-based materials; it may be low-tech, but it's an elegant solutionnonetheless. Simplicity and ease of handling make for a goodgeneral-reference filing system—one that lets you feel comfort-able about creating a folder for scraps of paper from a meeting.Pages in Notebooks A great advantage of paper-based loose-leafnotebooks is that you can dedicate a whole page or group of pagesto an individual project. For years I maintained a midsize notebookwith a "Projects" list in front and a "Project Support" sectiontoward the back, where I always had some blank pages to captureany random thinking or plans and details about projects on my list.Each of the methods described above can be effective in organiz-ing project thinking. The key is that you must consistently lookfor any action steps inherent in your project notes, and review thenotes themselves as often as you think is necessary, given thenature of the project.You'll also want to clear out many of your notes once they*Many Lotus Notes users don't even realize they can do this, but in fact it's oneof the program's most powerful features. If you have Notes, check with yourresident IT resource person and have him or her request system permission andshow you how.CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSbecome inactive or unreal, to keep the whole system from catch-ing the "stale" virus. I've found a lot of value in capturing thesetypes of thoughts, more for the way it consistently h e l p s  m ythinking process than because I end up using every idea (most Idon't!). But I try to make sure not to let my old thoughts stayaround too long, pretending they're useful when they're not.Organizing Nonactionable DataInterestingly, one of the biggest problems with most people's per-sonal management systems is that they blend a few actionablethings with a large amount of data and material that has value butno action attached. Having good, consistent structures withwhich to manage the nonactionable items in our work and lives isas important as managing our action and project reminders.When the nonactionable items aren't properly managed, theyclog up the whole process.Unactionable items fall into two large categories: referencematerials and reminders of things that need no action now butmight at a later date.Reference MaterialsMuch of what comes across your desk and into your life in generalis reference material. There's no action required, but it's informa-tion that you want to keep, for a variety of reasons. Your majordecisions will be how much to keep, how much room to dedicateto it, what form it should be stored in, and where. Much of thatwill be a personal or organizational judgment call based uponlegal or logistical concerns or personal preferences. The only timeyou should have attention on your reference material is when youneed to change your system in some way because you have toomuch or too little information, given your needs or preferences.The problem most people have psychologically with all theirstuff is that it's still "stuff"—that is, they haven't decided what's163PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOactionable and what's not. Once you've made a clean distinctionabout which is which, what's left as reference should have nopull or incompletion associated with it—it's just your library.Your only decision then is how big a library you want. Whenyou've fully implemented this action-management metho-dology, you can be as big a packrat as your space (physicaland digital) will allow. As I've increased the size of the harddisk in my computer, I've kept that much more e-mail in myarchives. The more the merrier, as far as I'm concerned, sinceincreasing the volume of pure reference material adds no psychicweight.The Variety of Reference SystemsThere are a number of ways to organize reference material, andmany types of tools to use. What follows is a brief discussion ofsome of the most common.• General-reference filing—paper and e-mail• Large-category filing• Rolodexes and contact managers• Libraries and archivesGeneral-Reference Filing As I've said, a good filingsystem is critical for processing and organizing yourstuff. It's also a must for dealing with the sometimeshuge volume of paper-based materials that are valu-able for you for one reason or another. Ideally youwill already have set up a general-reference filing s y s -tem as you were processing "in." You need to feelcomfortable storing even a single piece of paper thatyou might want to refer to later, and your systemmust be informal and accessible enough that it's a snap to file itaway in your alphabetized general-reference system, right at handwhere you work. If you're not set up that way yet, look back atchapter 4 for help on this topic.164Your filing systemshould be a simplelibrary of data,easilyretrievable—not your reminderfor actions,projects, priorities,CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSMost people seem to wind up with 200 to 400 paper-basedgeneral-reference files and 30 to 100 e-mail reference folders.Large-Category Filing Any topic that requires more than fiftyfile folders should probably be given its own section or drawer,with its own alpha-sorted system. For instance, if you're managinga corporate merger and need to keep hold of a lot of the paper-work, you may want to dedicate two or three whole file cabinets toall the documentation required in the due-diligence p r o c e s s .  I fgardening or sailing or cooking is your passion, you may need atleast a whole file drawer for those designated hobbies.Bear in mind that if your "area of focus" has support materialthat could blend into other "areas of focus," you may run into thedilemma of whether to store the information in general referenceor in the specialized reference files. When you read a great articleabout wood fencing and want to keep it, does that go in your"Garden" cabinet or in the general system with other informationabout home-related projects? As a general rule, it's best to stickwith one general-reference system except for a very limited num-ber of discrete topics.Rolodexes and Contact Managers Much of the information thatyou need to keep is directly related to people in your network. Youneed to track contact information of all sorts—home and officephone numbers and addresses, cell-phone numbers, fax numbers,e-mail addresses, and so on. In addition, if you find it useful, youmay want to maintain information about birthdays, names offriends' and colleagues' family members, hobbies, favorite winesand foods, and the like. In a more rigorous professional vein, youmay need or want to track hire dates, performance-review dates,goals and objectives, and other potentially relevant data for staffdevelopment purposes.The telephone/address section of most of the organizers soldin the last fifty years is probably (along with the calendar) theirmost commonly used component. Everyone needs to keep track165PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOof phone numbers. It's instructive to note that this is purely andsimply reference material. No action is required—this is justinformation that you might need to access in the future.So there's no big mystery about how to organize it, asidefrom the logistics for your individual needs. Again, the only prob-lem comes up when people try to make their Rolodexes serve astools for reminding them about things they need to do. Thatdoesn't work. As long as all the actions relative to people youknow have been identified and tracked in your action reminderlists, there's no role for telephone and address systems to fill otherthan being a neutral address book.The only issue then becomes how much information youneed to keep and where and in what equipment you need to keepit in order to have it accessible when you want it. Nothing's per-fect in that regard, but as the small digital tools become easier touse and connect to larger databases, you'll be able to have moreinformation at hand with the same or less effort.Libraries and Archives: Personalized Levels Information thatmight be useful lives at many levels. You could probably find outpretty much anything if you were willing to dig deep enough. Thequestion of how much to keep, how close, and in what form, willbe a changing reality, given the variables of your needs and yourparticular comfort levels with data. Relative to your personalorganization and productivity, this is not a core issue,so long as all of your projects and actions are in acontrol system that you work with regularly. Refer-ence material in all its forms then becomes nothingmore or less than material to capture and createaccess to according to your particular proclivities a n drequirements.Some degree of consistency will always makethings easier. What kinds of things do you need with you all thetime? Those must go into your ubiquitous planner or PDA. Whatdo you need specifically for meetings or off-site events? That166If material is purelyfor reference, theonly issue iswhether it's worththe time and spacerequired to keep it.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSshould be put into your briefcase, pack, satchel, or purse. Whatmight you need when you're working in your office? That shouldbe put into your personal filing system or your networked com-puter. What about rare situations relative to your job? Materialneeded for those could be archived in departmental files or off-site storage. What could you find anytime you might need it, onthe Web? You don't need to do anything with that information,unless you need it when you're away from a Web connection, inwhich case you should print the data out when you're online andstore it in a file you can take with you.Do you see how that personal organization of referencematerial is simply a logistical issue? Distinguishing actionablethings from nonactionable ones is the key success factor in thisarena. Once you've done that, you have total freedom to manageand organize as much or as little reference material as you want.It's a highly individual decision that ought to be based on the ratioof the value received to the time and effort required to capture andmaintain it.Someday/MaybesThe last thing to deal with in your organization system is how totrack things that you may want to reassess in the future. Thesecould range from a special trip you might want to take one day, tobooks you might want to read, to projects you might want totackle in the next fiscal year, to skills and talents you might wantto develop. For a full implementation of this modelyou'll need some sort of "back burner" or "on hold"component.There are several ways to stage things for laterreview, all of which will work to get them off yourcurrent radar and your mind. You can put the itemson various versions of "Someday/Maybe" lists ortrigger them on your calendar or in a paper-based"tickler" system.167Someday/Maybe'sare not throwawayitems. They may besome of the mostinteresting andcreative thingsyou'll ever getinvolved with.168PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO"Someday/Maybe" ListIt's highly likely that if you did a complete mind-sweep when youwere collecting things out of your psychic RAM, you came up withsome things you're not sure you want to commit to. "Learn Span-ish," "Get Marcie a horse," "Climb Mt, Washington," and "Build aguest cottage" are typical projects that fall into this category.If you haven't already done it, I recommend that you create a"Someday/Maybe" list in whatever organizing system you've cho-sen. Then give yourself permission to populate that list with allthe items of that type that have occurred to you so fa r .  Y ou' l lprobably discover that simply having the list and starting to fill itout will cause you to come up with all kinds of creative ideas.You may also be surprised to find that some of the things youwrite on the list will actually come to pass, almost without yourmaking any conscious effort to make them happen. If y o uacknowledge the power of the imagination to foster changes inperception and performance, it's easy to see how having a"Someday/Maybe" list out in front of your conscious mind couldpotentially add many wonderful adventures to your life and work.We're likely to seize opportunities when they arise if we've alreadyidentified and captured them as a possibility. That has certainlybeen my own experience: learning to play the flute and how to sailbig boats both started in this category for me. In addition toyour in-basket, there are two rich sources to tap for your "Some-day/Maybe" list: your creative imagination and your list of currentprojects.Make an Inventory of Your Creative Imaginings What are thethings you really might want to do someday if you have the time,money, and inclination? Write them on your have "Someday/Maybe" list. Typical categories include:• Things to get or build for your home• Hobbies to take upCHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS• Skills to learn• Creative expressions to explore• Clothes and accessories to buy• Toys (gear!) to acquire• Trips to take• Organizations to join• Service projects to contribute to• Things to see and doReassess Your Current Projects    Now's a good time to review your"Projects" list from a more elevated perspective (that is, the stand-point of your job and goals) and consider whetheryou might transfer some of your current commit-ments to "Someday/Maybe." If on reflection yourealize that an optional project doesn't have a chanceof getting your attention for the next months ormore, move it to this list.Special Categories of "Someday/Maybe"More than likely you have some special interests that involve lotsof possible things to do. It can be fun to collect these on lists. Forinstance:• Food—recipes, menus, restaurants, wines• Children—things to do with them• Books to read• CDs to buy• Videos to buy/rent• Cultural events to attend• Gift ideas• Garden ideas• Web sites to surf• Weekend trips to take• Meeting ideas• Party ideas169What lies in ourpower to do, lies inour power notto do.—170PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO• Ideas—Misc. (meaning you don't know where else to putthem!)These kinds of lists can be a cross between reference and"Someday/Maybe"—reference because you can just collect andadd to lists of good wines or restaurants or books, to consult asyou like; "Someday/Maybe" because you might want to review thelisted items on a regular basis to remind yourself to try one ormore of them at some point.In any case, this is another great reason to have an organizingsystem that makes it easy to capture things that may add valueand variety and interest to your life—without clogging your mindand work space with undecided, unfinished business.The Danger of "Hold and Review" Files and PilesMany people have created some sort of "Hold and Review" pile orfile (or whole drawer) that vaguely fits within the c a t e g o r y  o f"Someday/Maybe." They tell themselves, "When I have time, Imay like to get to this," and a "Hold and Review" file seems a con-venient place to put it. I personally don't recommend this particu-lar kind of subsystem, because in virtually every case I have comeacross, the client "held" but didn't "review," and there was numb-ness and resistance about the stack. The value of "someday/maybe" disappears if you don't put your conscious awareness backon it with some consistency.Also, there's a big difference between something that's man-aged well, as a "Someday/Maybe" list, and something that's just acatchall bucket for "stuff." Usually much of that stuff needs to betossed, some of it needs to go into "Read/Review," some needsto be filed as reference, some belongs on the calendar or in atickler file (see page 173) for review in a month or perhaps at thebeginning of the next quarter, and some actually has next actionson it. Many times, after appropriately processing someone's"Hold and Review" drawer or file, I've discovered there was noth-ing left in it!CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSUsing the Calendar for Future OptionsYour calendar can be a very handy place to park reminders ofthings you might want to consider doing in the future. Most of thepeople I've coached were not nearly as comfortable with their cal-endars as they could have been; otherwise they probably wouldhave found many more things to put in there.One of the three uses of a calendar is for day-specific informa-tion. This category can include a number of things, but one of themost creative ways to utilize this function is to enter things thatyou want to take off your mind and reassess at some later date.Here are a few of the myriad things you should consider inserting:• Triggers for activating projects• Events you might want to participate in• Decision catalystsTriggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that youdon't really need to think about now but that deserves a flag atsome point in the future, you can pick an appropriate date and puta reminder about the project in your calendar for that day. Itshould go in some day-specific (versus time-specific) calendar slotfor the things you want to be reminded of on that day; then whenthe day arrives, you see the reminder and insert the item as anactive project on your "Projects" list. Typical candidates for thistreatment are:• Special events with a certain lead time for handling (productlaunches, fund-raising drives, etc.)• Regular events that you need to prepare for, such as budgetreviews, annual conferences, planning events, or meetings (e.g.,when should you add next year's "annual sales conference" toyour "Projects" list?)• Key dates for significant people that you might want to do some-thing about (birthdays, anniversaries, holiday gift-giving, etc.)171PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOEvents You Might Want to Participate In You probably get noticesconstantly about seminars, conferences, speeches, and social andcultural events that you may want to decide about attending as thetime gets closer. So figure out when that "closer" time is and put atrigger in your calendar on the appropriate date—for example:"Chamber of Commerce breakfast tomorrow?""Tigers season tickets go on sale today""PBS special on Australia tonight 8:00 P.M.""Church BBQ next Saturday"If you can think of any jogs like these that you'd like to putinto your system, do it right now.Decision Catalysts    Once in a while there may be a significantdecision that you need to make but can't (or don't want to) makeright away. That's fine, as long as you've concluded that the addi-tional information you need has to come from an internal ratherthan an external source (e.g., you need to sleep on it).(Obviously, external data you need in order to make adecision should go on your "Next Actions" or "Wait-ing For" lists.) But in order to move to a level of OK-ness about not deciding, you'd better put out a safetynet that you can trust to get you to focus on the issueappropriately in the future. A calendar reminder canserve that purpose.*Some typical decision areas in this category include:• Hire/fire• Merge/acquire/sell/divest• Change job/career
172*If you're using a group-accessible calendar, you must maintain discretion aboutthese kinds of triggers. Digital calendars usually have "private" categorizationfunctions you can use for entries you don't necessarily want everyone to see.It's OK to decide notto decide—as longas you have adecide-not-to-decide system.CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSThis is a big topic to devote so little space to, I know, but goahead and ask yourself, "Is there any major decision for which Ishould create a future trigger, so I can feel comfortable just 'hang-ing out' with it for now?" If there is, put some reminder in yourcalendar to revisit the issue.The "Tickler" FileOne elegant way to manage nonactionable items that may needan action in the future is the "tickler" file.* A three-dimensionalversion of a calendar, it allows you to hold physical reminders ofthings that you want to see or remember—not now, but in thefuture. It can be an extremely functional tool, allowing you to ineffect set up your own post office and "mail" things to yourself forreceipt on a designated future date. I myself have used a tickler filefor years and can't imagine being without it.Essentially the tickler is a simple file-folder system thatallows you to distribute paper and other physical reminders insuch a way that whatever you want to see on a particular date inthe future "automatically" shows up that day in your in-basket.If you have a secretary or assistant, you can entrust at least apart of this task to him or her, assuming that he/she has someworking version of this or a similar system. Typical exampleswould be:• "Hand me this agenda the morning of the day I have themeeting."• "Give this back to me on Monday to rethink, since it applies toa meeting on Wednesday."• "Remind me about the Hong Kong trip two weeks ahead, andwe'll plan the logistics."Then every day of the week, that day's folder is pulled andreviewed.*Also referred to as a "suspense," "bring forward," or "follow-up" file.173174PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOWhile you can (and probably should) utilize staff to handleas much of this as is appropriate, I recommend that, if you canintegrate it into your life-style, you maintain your own tickler file.There are many useful functions it can perform, at least some ofwhich you may want to avail yourself of outside the pale of yourassistant's responsibilities. I use my tickler file t o  m a na g e  m ytravel tickets and confirmations; paper-based travel directions,agendas, and maps; reminders of event notifications that come inthe mail; information about "might-want-to-buy" kinds of thingsI want to reconsider in the future; and so forth.Bottom line: the tickler file demands only a one-second-per-day new behavior to make it work, and it has a payoff valuelogarithmically greater than the personal investment.Setting Up a Tickler File You need forty-three folders—thirty-one daily files labeled "1" through "31," and twelve more labeledwith the names of the months of the year. The daily files are keptin front, beginning with the file for tomorrow's date (if today isOctober 5, then the first file would be "6"). The succeeding dailyfiles represent the days of the rest of the month ("6" through"31"). Behind the "31" file is the monthly file for the next month("November"), and behind that are the daily files "1" though "5."Following that are the rest of the monthly files ("December"through "October"). The next daily file is emptied into your in-basket every day, and then the folder is refiled at the back of thedailies (at which point, instead of October 6, it represents Novem-ber 6). In the same way, when the next monthly file reaches thefront (on October 31 after you empty the daily file, the "Novem-ber" file will be the next one, with the daily files "1" through "31"behind it), it's emptied into the in-basket and refiled at the backof the monthlies to represent November a year from now. This is a"perpetual" file, meaning that at any given time it contains files forthe next thirty-one days and the next twelve months.The big advantage of using file folders for your tickler system isthat they allow you to store actual documents (the form that needsFILE-FOLDER-STYLE SAMPLE SETUP (OCTOBER 5)to be filled out on a certain day, the memo that needs to be reviewedthen, the telephone note that needs action on a specific date, etc.).In order for the system to work, you must update it everyday. If you forget to empty the daily file, you won't trust the sys-tem to handle important data, and you'll have to manage thosethings some other way. If you leave town (or don't access the fileon the weekend), you must be sure to check the folders for thedays you'll be away, before you go.
175
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS176PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOChecklists: Creative RemindersThe last topic in personal system organization that deserves someattention is the care and feeding of checklists, those recipes ofpotential ingredients for projects, events, and areas of value, inter-est, and responsibility.The most creative checklists are often generated at the backend of a good consulting process with a team or company. Goodones also show up as areas of focus for training staff or hiring intojob slots.When I'm clearing in-baskets with clients and reviewingother things they're concerned about, we often run across little"Memos to Self" like:• Exercise more regularly.• Make sure we have evaluation forms for each training.• Spend more quality time with my kids.• Do more proactive planning for the division.• Maintain good morale with my team.• Ensure we are in alignment with corporate strategy.• Keep the client billing process up to date.What should you do with these "fuzzier" kinds of internalcommitments and areas of attention?First, Clarify Inherent Projects and ActionsFor much of this kind of "stuff," there is still a project and/or anaction that needs to be defined. "Exercise more regularly" reallytranslates for many people into "Set up regular exercise program"(project) and "Call Sally for suggestions about personal trainers"(real action step). In such cases, inherent projects and actions stillneed to be clarified and organized into a personal system.But there are some things that don't quite fit into thatcategory.CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSBlueprinting Key Areas of Work and ResponsibilityObjectives like "Maintain good physical conditioning" or "Physi-cal health and vitality" may still need to be built into some sort ofoverview checklist that will be reviewed regularly. You have multi-ple layers of outcomes and standards playing on your psyche andyour choices at any point in time, and knowing what those are, atall the different levels, is always a good idea.I suggested earlier that there are at least six levels of your"work" that could be defined, and that each level deserves its ownacknowledgment and evaluation. A complete inventory of every-thing you hold important and are committed to on each of thoselevels would represent an awesome checklist. It might include:• Career goals• Service• Family• Relationships• Community• Health and energy• Financial resources• Creative expressionAnd then moving down a level, within your job, youmight want some reminders of your key areas of responsibility,your staff, your values, and so on. A list of these might containpoints like:• Team morale• Processes• Timelines• Staff issues• Workload• Communication177PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWOAll of these items could in turn be included on the lists inyour personal system, as reminders to you, as needed, to keep theship on course, on an even keel.The More Novel the Situation, the More Control Is RequiredThe degree to which any of us needs to maintain checklists andexternal controls is directly related to our unfamiliarity with thearea of responsibility. If you've been doing what you're doing for along time, and there's no pressure on you to change in that area,you probably need minimal external personal organization to stayon cruise control. You know when things must happen, and howto make them happen, and your system is fine, status quo. Often,though, that's not the case.Many times you'll want some sort of checklist to help youmaintain a focus until you're more familiar with what you'redoing. If your CEO suddenly disappeared, for example, and youhad instantly to fill his shoes, you'd need some overviews andoutlines in front of you for a while to ensure that you had all themission-critical aspects of the job handled. And if you've just beenhired into a new position, with new responsibilities that are rela-tively unfamiliar to you, you'll want a framework of control and, structure, if only for the first few months.There have been times when I needed to make a list of areasthat I had to handle, temporarily, until things were under control.For instance, when my wife and I decided to create abrand-new   structure   for   a   business   we'd   beeninvolved with for many years, I took on areas ofresponsibility I'd never had to deal with before—namely, accounting, computers, marketing, legal, andadministration. For several months I needed to keepa checklist of those responsibilities in front of me toensure that I filled in the blanks everywhere and managed thetransition as well as I could. After the business got onto "cruisecontrol" to some degree, I no longer needed that list.178Checklists can behighly useful to letyou know what youdon't need to beconcerned about.CHAPTER 7 |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETSChecklists at All LevelsBe open to creating any kind of checklist as the urge strikes you.The possibilities are endless—from "Core Life Values" to "Thingsto Take Camping." Making lists, ad hoc, as they occur to you, isone of the most powerful yet subtlest and simplest proceduresthat you can install in your life.To spark your creative thinking, here's a list of some of thetopics of checklists I've seen and used over the years:• Personal Affirmations (i.e., personal value statements)• Job Areas of Responsibility (key responsibility areas)• Travel Checklist (everything to take on or do before a trip)• Weekly Review (everything to review and/or update on a weeklybasis)• Training Program Components (all the things to handle whenputting on an event, front to back)• Clients• Conference Checklist (everything to handle when putting on aconference)• Focus Areas (key life roles and responsibilities)• Key People in My Life/Work (relationships to assess regularlyfor completion and opportunity development)• Organization Chart (key people and areas of output to manageand maintain)• Personal Development (things to evaluate regularly to ensurepersonal balance and progress)Get comfortable with checklists, both ad hoc and more per-manent. Be ready to create and eliminate them as required.Appropriately used, they can be a tremendous asset in personalproductivity.If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an openloop in your life and work, processed each one of those items in179PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOterms of what it means to you and what actions are required, andorganized the results into a complete system that holds a currentand complete overview—large and small—of all your presentand"someday" projects, then you're ready for the next phase of imple-mentation in the art of stress-free productivity—the reviewprocess.\
180Reviewing: Keeping YourSystem FunctionalTHE PURPOSE OF this whole method of workflow management is notto let your brain become lax, but rather to enable it to movetoward more elegant and productive activity. In order to earn thatfreedom, however, your brain must engage on some consistentbasis with all your commitments and activities. You m u s t  b eassured that you're doing what you need to be doing, and that it'sOK to be not doing what you're not doing. Reviewing your systemon a regular basis and keeping it current and functional are pre-requisites for that kind of control.If you have a list of calls you must make, for example, theminute that list is not totally current with all the calls you need tomake, your brain will not trust the system, and it won't get relieffrom its lower-level mental tasks. It will have to take back the jobof remembering, processing, and reminding, which, as you shouldknow by now, it doesn't do very effectively.All of this means your system cannot be static. In order tosupport appropriate action choices, it must be kept up to date.And it should trigger consistent and appropriate evaluation ofyour life and work at several horizons.There are two major issues that need to be handled at this point:• What do you look at in all this, and when?• What do you need to do, and how often, to ensure that all of itworks as a consistent system, freeing you to think and manage ata higher level?181PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOA real review process will lead to enhanced and proactivenew thinking in key areas of your life and work. Such think-ing emerges from both focused concentration and serendipi-tous brainstorming, which will be triggered and galvanizedby a consistent personal review of your inventory of actions andprojects.What to Look At, WhenYour personal system and behaviors need to be established in sucha way that you can see all the action options you need to see, whenyou need to see them. This is really just common sense, but fewpeople actually have their processes and their organization honedto the point where they are as functional as they could be.When you have access to a phone and any discretionarytime, you ought to at least glance at the list of all the phone callsyou need to make, and then either direct yourself to the best oneto handle or give yourself permission to feel OK about not both-ering with any of them. When you're about to go in for a discus-sion with your boss or your partner, take a moment to review theoutstanding agendas you have with him or her, so you'll know thatyou're using your time most effectively. When you need to pick upsomething at the dry cleaner's, first quickly review all the othererrands that you might be able to do en route.People often ask me, "How much time do youspend looking at your system?" My answer is simply,"As much time as I need to to feel comfortable aboutwhat I'm doing." In actuality it's an accumulation oftwo seconds here, three seconds there. What mostpeople don't realize is that my lists are in one sensemy office. Just as you might have Post-its and stacksof phone slips at your workstation, so do I on my"Next Actions" lists. Assuming that you've completely collected,processed, and organized your stuff, you'll most likely take only a182A few seconds aday is usually allyou need for review,as long as you'relooking at the rightthings at the righttime.CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONALfew brief moments here and there to access your system for day-to-day reminders.Looking at Your Calendar FirstYour most frequent review will probably be of your daily calendar,and your daily tickler folder if you're maintaining one, to see the"hard landscape" and assess what has to get done. You need toknow the time-and-space parameters first. Knowing that youhave wall-to-wall meetings from 8:00 A.M. through 6:00 P.M., forexample, with barely a half-hour break for lunch, will help youmake necessary decisions about any other activities.. . . Then Your Action ListsAfter you review all your day- and time-specific commitmentsand handle whatever you need to about them, your next most fre-quent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you couldpossibly do in your current context. If you're in your office, forinstance, you'll look at your lists of calls, computer actions, and in-office things to do. This doesn't necessarily mean you will actuallybe doing anything on those lists; you'll just evaluate them againstthe flow of other work coming at you to ensure that you make thebest choices about what to deal with. You need to feel confidentthat you're not missing anything critical.Frankly, if your calendar is trustworthy and your action listsare current, they may be the only things in the system you'll needto refer to more than every couple of days. There have been manydays when I didn't need to look at any of my lists, in fact, becauseit was clear from the front end—my calendar—what I wouldn'tbeable to do.The Right Review in the Right ContextYou may need to access any one of your lists at any time. Whenyou and your spouse are decompressing at the end of the day,and you want to be sure you'll take care of the "business" the twoof you manage together about home and family, you'll want to183PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOlook at your accumulated agendas for him or her. On the otherhand, if your boss pops in for a face-to-face conversation aboutcurrent realities and priorities, it will be highly functional for youto have your "Projects" list up to date and your "Agenda" list forhim or her right at hand.Updating Your SystemThe real trick to ensuring the trustworthiness of the whole organiza-tion system lies in regularly refreshing your psyche and your systemfrom a more elevated perspective. That's impossible t odo, however, if your lists fall too far behind your r e a l i t y .You won't be able to fool yourself about this: if your sys-tem is out of date, your brain will be forced to fullyengage again at the lower level of remembering.This is perhaps the biggest challenge of all.Once you've tasted what it's like to have a clear headand feel in control of everything that's going on, canyou do what you need to to maintain that as anoperational standard? The many years I've spentresearching and implementing this  methodologywith countless people have proved to me that the magic key to thesustainability of the process is the Weekly Review.The Power of the Weekly ReviewIf you're like me and most other people, no matter how good yourintentions may be, you're going to have the world come at youfaster than you can keep up. Many of us seem to have it in ournatures consistently to entangle ourselves in more than we havethe ability to handle. We book ourselves back to back in meetingsall day, go to after-hours events that generate ideas and commit-ments we need to deal with, and get embroiled in engagementsand projects that have the potential to spin our creative intelli-gence into cosmic orbits.1
184To makeknowledgeproductive, wewill have to learnto see both forestand tree. We willhave to learn toconnect.—Peter F.CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONALThat whirlwind of activity is precisely what makes theWeekly Review so valuable. It builds in some capturing, reeval-uation, and reprocessing time to keep you in bal-ance. There is simply no way to do this necessaryregrouping while you're trying to get everyday workdone.The Weekly Review will also sharpen your intu-itive focus on your important projects as you dealwith the flood of new input and potential distrac-tions coming at you the rest of the week. You're goingto have to learn to say no—faster, and to more things—in order tostay afloat and comfortable. Having some dedicated time inwhich to at least get up to the project level of thinking goes a longway toward making that easier.What Is the Weekly Review?Very simply, the Weekly Review is whatever you need to do to getyour head empty again. It's going through the five phases ofworkflow management—collecting, processing, organizing, andreviewing all your outstanding involvements—until you can hon-estly say, "I absolutely know right now everything I'm not doingbut could be doing if I decided to."From a nitty-gritty, practical standpoint, here is the drill thatcan get you there:Loose Papers Pull out all miscellaneous scraps of paper, businesscards, receipts, and so on that have crept into the crevices of yourdesk, clothing, and accessories. Put it all into your in-basket forprocessing.Process Your Notes Review any journal entries, meeting notes, ormiscellaneous notes scribbled on notebook paper. List actionitems, projects, waiting-fors, calendar events, and s o m e d a y /maybes, as appropriate. File any reference notes and materials.Stage your "Read/Renew" material. Be ruthless with yourself,185You will invariablytake in moreopportunities thanyour system canprocess on a dailybasis.186PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOprocessing all notes and thoughts relative to interactions, projects,new initiatives, and input that have come your way since your lastdownload, and purging those not needed.Previous Calendar Data Review past calendar dates in detail forremaining action items, reference information, and so on, andtransfer that data into the active system. Be able to archive yourlast week's calendar with nothing left uncaptured.Upcoming Calendar Look at future calendar events (long- andshort-term). Capture actions about arrangements and p r e p a r a -tions for any upcoming events.Empty Your Head Put in writing (in appropriate categories) anynew projects, action items, waiting-fors, someday/maybes, and soforth that you haven't yet captured.Review "Projects" (and Larger Outcome) Lists Evaluate the statusof projects, goals, and outcomes one by one, ensuring that at leastone current kick-start action for each is in your system.Review "Next Actions"Lists Mark off completed actions. Reviewfor reminders of further action steps to capture.Review "Waiting For" List Record appropriate actions for anyneeded follow-up. Check off received items.Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything you haven'tdone that you need to do?Review "Someday/Maybe" List Check for any projects that mayhave become active and transfer them to "Projects." Delete itemsno longer of interest.CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONALReview "Pending" and Support Files Browse through all work-in-progress support material to trigger new actions, completions,and waiting-fors.Be Creative and Courageous Are there any new, wonderful, hare-brained, creative, thought-provoking, risk-taking ideas you canadd to your system?This review process is common sense, but fewof us do it as well as we could, and that means asregularly as we should to keep a clear mind and asense of relaxed control.The Right Time and Place for the ReviewThe Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves youto establish good habits, environments, and tools tosupport it. Once your comfort zone has been estab-lished for the kind of relaxed control that GettingThings Done is all about, you won't have to worry toomuch about making yourself do your review—you'llhave to to get back to your personal standards again.Until then, do whatever you need to, once aweek, to trick yourself into backing away from thedaily grind for a couple of hours—not to zone out,but to rise up at least to "10,000 feet" and catch up.If you have the luxury of an office or work spacethat can be somewhat isolated from the people and interactions ofthe day, and if you have anything resembling a typical Monday-to-Friday workweek, I recommend that you block out two hoursearly every Friday afternoon for the review. Three factors makethis an ideal time:• The events of the week are likely to be still fresh enough for youto be able to do a complete postmortem ("Oh, yeah, I need tomake sure I get back to her about...").187"Point of view"is that qulnt-essentially humansolution toinformationoverload, anintuitive process ofreducing things toan essentialrelevant andmanageableminimum. . . . Ina world ofhyperabundantcontent, point ofview will becomethe scarcest ofresources.—Paul188PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO•When you (invariably) uncover actions that require reachingpeople at work, you'll still have time to do that before they leavefor the weekend.• It's great to clear your psychic decks so you can go into theweekend ready for refreshment and recreation, with nothing onyour mind.You may be the kind of person, however, who doesn't havenormal weekends. I, for example, often have as much to do onSaturday and Sunday as on Wednesday. But I do have theluxury(?) of frequent long plane trips, which provide an idealopportunity for me to catch up. A good friend and client of mine,an executive in the world's largest aerospace company, has his ownSunday-night ritual of relaxing in his home office and processingthe hundreds of notes he's generated during his week of back-to-back meetings.Whatever your life-style, you need a weekly regroupingritual. You likely have something like this (or close to it) already. Ifso, leverage the habit by adding into it a higher-altitude reviewprocess.The people who find it hardest to make time for this revieware those who have constantly on-demand work and home envi-ronments, with zero built-in time or space for regrouping. Themost stressed professionals I have met are the ones who have to bemission-critically reactive at work (e.g., high-level equities tradersand chiefs of staff) and then go home to a couple of under-ten-year-old children and a spouse who also works. The more fortunateof them have a one-hour train commute.If you recognize yourself in that picture, your greatest chal-lenge will be to build in a consistent process of regrouping, whenyour world is not directly in your face. You'll need to either acceptthe requirement of an after-hours time at your desk on a Fridaynight or establish a relaxed but at-work kind of location and timeat home.CHAPTER 8  I  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONALExecutive Operational Review Time I've coached many execu-tives to block out two hours on their calendars on Fridays. Forthem the biggest problem is how to balance quality thinking andcatch-up time with the urgent demands of mission-critical inter-actions. This is a tough call. The most senior and savvy of them,however, know the value of sacrificing the seeminglyurgent for the truly important, and they create theirislands of time for some version of this process.Even the executives who have integrated a con-sistent reflective time for their work, though, oftenseem to give short shrift to the more mundane reviewand catch-up process at the "10,000-foot" level. Between wall-to-wall meetings and ambling around your koi pond with a chardon-nay at sunset, there's got to be a slightly elevated level of reflectionand regrouping required for operational control andfocus. If you think you have all your open loops fullyidentified, clarified, assessed, and actionalized, you'reprobably kidding yourself.The "Bigger Picture" ReviewsYes, at some point you must clarify the larger out-comes, the long-term goals, the visions and princi-ples that ultimately drive and test your decisions.What are your key goals and objectives in yourwork? What should you have in place a year or threeyears from now? How is your career going? Is this thelife-style that is most fulfilling to you? Are you doingwhat you really want or need to do, from a deeperand longer-term perspective?The explicit focus of this book is not at those"30,000-" to "50,000+-foot" levels. Urging you tooperate from a higher perspective is, however, itsimplicit purpose—to assist you in making your total189Your best thoughtsabout work won'thappen while you'reat work.Thinking is thevery essence of andthe most difficultthing to do in,business and inlife. Empirebuilders spendhour-after-hour onmental work. . .while others party.If you're not con-sciously aware ofputting forth theeffort to exert self-guided integratedthinking . . . thenyou're giving in tolaziness and nolonger control yourlife.—David Kekich190PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWOlife expression more fulfilling and better aligned with the biggergame we're all about. As you increase the speed and agility withwhich you clear the "runway" and "10,000-foot" levels of your lifeand work, be sure to revisit the other levels you're engaged in, nowand then, to maintain a truly clear head.How often you ought to challenge yourself with that type ofwide-ranging review is something only you can know. The princi-ple I must affirm at this juncture is this:You need to assess your life and work at the appropriate hori-zons, making the appropriate decisions, at the appropriate intervals,in order to really come clean.Which brings us to the ultimate point and challenge of all thispersonal collecting, processing, organizing, and reviewing method-ology: It's 9:22 A.M. Wednesday morning—what do you do?Doing: Making theBest Action ChoicesWHEN IT COMES to your real-time, plow-through, get-it-done work-day, how do you decide what to do at any given point?As I've said, my simple answer is, trust yourheart. Or your spirit. Or, if you're allergic to thosekinds of words, try these: your gut, the seat of yourpants, your intuition.That doesn't mean you throw your life to thewinds—unless, of course, it does. I actually wentdown that route myself with some vengeance at onepoint in my life, and I can attest that the lessons w e r evaluable, if not necessarily necessary.*As outlined in chapter 2 (pages 48-53), I havefound three priority frameworks to be enormously helpful in thecontext of deciding actions:• The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment• The threefold model for evaluating daily work• The six-level model for reviewing your own work*There are various ways to give it all up. You can ignore the physical world andits realities and trust in the universe. I did that, and it was a powerful experi-ence. And one I wouldn't wish on anyone. Surrendering to your inner aware-ness, however, and its intelligence and practicality in the worlds you live in, isthe higher ground. Trusting yourself and the source of your intelligence is amore elegant version of freedom and personal productivity.191
Ultimately andalways you musttrust your intuition.There are manythings you can do,however, that canincrease that trust.192PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOThese happen to be shown in reverse hierarchical order—that is, the reverse of the typical strategic top-down perspective.In keeping with the nature of the Getting Things Done method-ology, I have found it useful to once again work from the bottom,up, meaning I'll start with the most mundane levels.The Four-Criteria Model forChoosing Actions in the MomentRemember that you make your action choices based on the fol-lowing four criteria, in order:1 |C o n t e x t2 |T i m e  a v a i l a b l e3 |E n e r g y  a v a i l a b l e4 |P r i o r i t yLet's examine each of these in the light of how you can beststructure your systems and behaviors to take advantage of itsdynamics.ContextAt any point in time, the first thing to consider is, what could youpossibly do, where you are, with the tools you have? Do you have aphone? Do you have access to the person you need to talk withface-to-face about three agenda items? Are you at the store whereyou need to buy something? If you can't do the action becauseyou're not in the appropriate location or don't have the appropri-ate tool, don't worry about it.As I've said, you should always organize your actionreminders by context—"Calls," "At Home," "At Computer,""Errands," "Agenda for Joe," "Agenda for Staff Meeting," andso on. Since context is the first criterion that comes into play inyour choice of actions, context-sorted lists prevent unnecessaryCHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESreassessments about what to do. If you have a bunch of things todo on one to-do list, but you actually can't do many of them in thesame context, you force yourself to continually keep reconsideringall of them.If you're stuck in traffic, and the only actions you can take arecalls on your cell phone, you want to be able to pull out just your"Calls" list. Your action lists should fold in or out, based on whatyou could possibly do at any time.A second real benefit accrues from organizing all youractions by the physical context needed: that in itself forces you tomake the all-important determination about the next p h y s i c a laction on your stuff. All of my action lists are set up this way, so Ihave to decide on the very next physical action before I can knowwhich list to put an item on (is this something that requires thecomputer? a phone? being in a store?). People who give them-selves a "Misc." action list (i.e., one not specific to a context) oftenlet themselves slide in the next-action decision, too.I frequently encourage clients to structure their list catego-ries early on as they're processing their in-baskets, because thatautomatically grounds their projects in the real things that need toget done to get them moving.Time AvailableThe second factor in choosing an action is how much time youhave before you have to do something else. If your meeting isstarting in ten minutes, you'll most likely select a different actionto do right now than you would if the next couple of hours wereclear.Obviously, it's good to know how much time you have athand (hence the emphasis on calendar and watch). A total-lifeaction-reminder inventory will give you maximum informationabout what you need to do, and make it much easier to matchyour actions to the windows you have. In other words, if you haveten minutes before that next meeting, find a ten-minute thing todo. If your lists have only the "big" or "important" things on them,193PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOno item listed may be possible to handle in a ten-minute period. Ifyou're going to have to do those shorter action things anyway, themost productive way to get them done is to utilize the little "weirdtime" windows that occur throughout the day.Energy AvailableAlthough you can increase your energy level at timesby changing your context and redirecting your focus,you can do only so much. The tail end of a day takenup mostly by a marathon budget-planning session isprobably not the best time to call a prospective clientor start drafting a performance-review policy. Itmight be better to call the airline to change a reserva-tion, process some expense receipts, or skim a tradejournal.Just as having all your next-action options available allowsyou to take advantage of various time slots, knowing about every-thing you're going to need to process and do at some pointwill allow you to match productive activity with your vitalitylevel.I recommend that you always keep an inventory of thingsthat need to be done that require very little mental or creativehorsepower. When you're in one of those low-energy states,do them. Casual reading (magazines, articles, and catalogs),telephone/address data that need to be inputted onto your com-puter, file purging, backing up your laptop, even just wateringyour plants and filling your stapler—these are some of the myriadthings that you've got to deal with sometime anyway.This is one of the best reasons for having veryclean edges to your personal management system: itmakes it easy to continue doing productive activitywhen you're not in top form. If you're in a low-energymode and your reading material is disorganized, yourreceipts are all over the place, your filing system i schaotic, and your in-basket is dysfunctional, it just194We all have times•when we thinkmore effectively,and times whenwe should not bethinking at all.—Daniel Cohen
There is no reasonnot to be highlyproductive, evenwhen you're not intop form.CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESseems like too much work to do to find and organize the tasks athand; so you simply avoid doing anything at all and then you feeleven worse. One of the best ways to increase your energy is toclose some of your loops. So always be sure to have some easyloops to close, right at hand.These first three criteria for choosing action (context, time, andenergy) bespeak the need for a complete next-action r e m i n d e rsystem. Sometimes you won't be in a mode to do that kind of■ thinking; it needs to have already been done. If it is, you can oper-ate much more "in your zone" and choose from delineated actionsthat fit the situation.PriorityGiven the context you're in and the time and energy you have, theobvious next criterion for action choice is relative priority: "Out ofall my remaining options, what is the most important thing forme to do?""How do I decide my priorities?" is a question Ifrequently hear from people I'm working with. Itsprings from their experience of having more on theirplate to do than they can comfortably handle. Theyknow that some hard choices have to be made, andthat some things may not get done at all.At the end of the day, in order to feel good aboutwhat you didn't get done, you must have made some consciousdecisions about your responsibilities, goals, and values. Thatprocess invariably includes an often complex interplay with thegoals, values, and directions of your organization and of the othersignificant people in your life, and with the importance of thoserelationships to you.
195It is impossible tofeel good aboutyour choices unlessyou are clear aboutwhat your workreally is.196PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOThe Threefold Model forEvaluating Daily WorkSetting priorities assumes that some things will be more importantthan others, but important relative to what? In this context, theanswer is, to your work—that is, the job you have accepted fromyourself and/or from others. This is where the next two frameworksneed to be brought to bear in your thinking. They're about definingyour work. Keep in mind that though much of this methodologywill be within the arena of your professional focus, I'm using "work"in the universal sense, to mean anything you have a commitment tomaking happen, personally as well as professionally.These days, daily work activity itself presents a relatively newtype of challenge to most professionals, something that it's help-ful to understand as we endeavor to build the most productivesystems. As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday,at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of three types ofactivities:• Doing predefined work• Doing work as it shows up• Defining your workYou may be doing things on your action lists, doing things asthey come up, or processing incoming inputs to determine whatwork that needs to be done, either then or later, from your lists.This is common sense. But many people let themselves getwrapped around the second activity—dealing with things thatshow up ad hoc—much too easily, and let the other two slide, totheir detriment.Let's say it's 10:26 A.M. Monday, and you're in your office.You've just ended a half-hour unexpected phone call w i t h  aprospective client. You have three pages of scribbled notes fromthe conversation. There's a meeting scheduled with your staff atCHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESeleven, about half an hour from now. You were out late last nightwith your spouse's parents and are still a little frayed around theedges (you told your father-in-law you'd get back to him about. . .what?). Your assistant just laid six telephone messages in front ofyou. You have a major strategic-planning session coming up intwo days, for which you have yet to formulate your ideas. The oillight in your car came on as you drove to work this morning. Andyour boss hinted as you passed her earlier in the hall that she'd likeyour thoughts on the memo she e-mailed you yesterday, beforethis afternoon's three o'clock meeting.Are your systems set up to maximally supportdealing with this reality, at 10:26 on Monday morn-ing? If you're still keeping things in your head, and ifyou're still trying to capture only the "critical" stuff onyour lists, I suggest that the answer is no.I've noticed that people are actually more com-fortable dealing with surprises and crises than theyare taking control of processing, organizing, review-ing, and assessing that part of their work that is not asself-evident. It's easy to get sucked into "busy" and"urgent" mode, especially when you have a lot of unprocessed andrelatively out-of-control work on your desk, in your e-mail, andon your mind.In fact, much of our life and work just shows up in t h emoment, and it usually becomes the priority when it does. It'sindeed true for most professionals that the nature of their jobrequires them to be instantly available to handle new work asit appears in many forms. For instance, you need to pay atten-tion to your boss when he shows up and wants a few minutesof your time. You get a request from a senior executive that sud-denly takes precedence over anything else you thought youneeded to do today. You find out about a serious problem with ful-filling a major customer's order, and you have to take care of itright away.These are all understandable judgment calls. But the angst197It is often easier toget wrapped up inthe urgent demandsof the moment thanto deal with your in-basket, e-mail, andthe rest of youropen loops.198PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWObegins to mount when the other actions on your lists are notreviewed and renegotiated by you or between you and everyoneelse. The constant sacrifices of not doing the work y o u  h a v edefined on your lists can be tolerated only if you know what you'renot doing. That requires regular processing of your i n - b a s k e t(defining your work) and consistent review of complete lists of allyour predetermined work.If choosing to do work that just showed up instead of doingwork you predefined is a conscious choice, based on your best call,that's playing the game the best way you can. Most people, how-ever, have major improvements to make in how they clarify, man-age, and renegotiate their total inventory of projects and actions. Ifyou let yourself get caught up in the urgencies of the moment,without feeling comfortable about what you're not dealing with,the result is frustration and anxiety. Too often the stress andlowered effectiveness are blamed on the "surprises." If you knowwhat you're doing, and what you're not doing, surprises are justanother opportunity to be creative and excel.In addition, when the in-basket and the action lists getignored for too long, random things lying in them tend to surfaceas emergencies later on, adding more ad hoc work-as-it-shows-upto fuel the fire.Many people use the inevitablity of an almost infinite streamof immediately evident things to do as a way to avoid the respon-sibilities of defining their work and managing their total inven-tory. It's easy to get seduced into not-quite-so-critical stuff that isright at hand, especially if your in-basket and your personal orga-nization are out of control. Too often "managing by wanderingaround" is an excuse for getting away from amorphous piles ofstuff.This is where the need for knowledge-work athletics reallyshows up. Most people did not grow up in a world where definingthe edges of work and managing huge numbers of open loops wererequired. But when you've developed the skill and, habits of pro-cessing input rapidly into a rigorously defined system, it becomesCHAPTER 9  I  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESmuch easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of whatto do, what to stop doing, and what to do instead.The Moment-to-Moment Balancing ActAt the black-belt level, you can shift like lightning from one footto the other and back again. While you're processing your in-basket, for example, your assistant comes in to tellyou about a situation that needs immediate atten-tion. No sweat—your tray is still there, with every-thing still to be processed in one stack, ready to bepicked up again when you can get back to it. Whileyou're on hold on the phone, you can be reviewingyour action lists and getting a sense of what you'regoing to do when the call is done. While you wait fora meeting to start, you can work down the "Read/Review" stack you've brought with you. And whenthe conversation you weren't expecting with yourboss shrinks the time you have before your nextmeeting to twelve minutes, you can easily find a wayto use that window to good advantage.You can do only one of these work activities at a time. If youstop to talk to someone in his or her office, you're not working offyour lists or processing incoming stuff. The challenge is to feelconfident about what you have decided to do.So how do you decide? This again will involve your intuitivejudgments—how important is the unexpected work, against allthe rest? How long can you let your in-basket go unprocessed andall your stuff unreviewed and trust that you're making good deci-sions about what to do?People often complain about the interruptions that preventthem from doing their work. But interruptions are unavoidable inlife. When you become elegant at dispatching what's coming inand are organized enough to take advantage of the "weird time"windows that show up, you can switch between one task and theother rapidly. You can be processing e-mails while you're on hold199To ignore theunexpected (even ifit were possible)would be to livewithoutopportunity,spontaneity, andthe rich momentsof which "life" ismade.—Stephen CoveyPRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOon a conference call. But you must learn to danceamong many tasks to keep a healthy balance of yourworkflow. Your choices will still have to be calibratedagainst your own clarity about the nature and goalsof your work.Your ability to deal with surprise is your com-petitive edge. But at a certain point, if you're notcatching up and getting things under control, stayingbusy with only the work at hand will undermine youreffectiveness. And ultimately, in order to know whether youshould stop what you're doing and do something else, you'll needto have to have a good sense of what your job requires and howthat fits into the other contexts of your life. The only way you canhave that is to evaluate your life and work appropriately at multi-ple horizons.The Six-Level Model forReviewing Your Own WorkThe six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 (pages 51-53) maybe thought of in terms of altitude:• 50,000+feet: Life• 40,000 feet: Three- to five-year visions• 30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals• 20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility• 10,000 feet: Current projects• Runway: Current actionsIt makes sense that each of these levels should enhance andalign with the ones above it. In other words, your priorities will sitin a hierarchy from the top down. Ultimately, if the phone callyou're supposed to make clashes with your life purpose or values,to be in sync with yourself you won't make it. If your job structure200Do ad hoc work asit shows up, notbecause it is thepath of least resis-tance, but becauseit is the thing youneed to do, vis-a-visall the rest.CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESdoesn't match up with where you need to be a year from now,you should rethink how you've framed your areas of focus andresponsibilities, if you want to get where you're going most effi-ciently.Let's look at that first example from the bottom up. Thephone call you need to make (action) is about the deal you'reworking on (project), which would increase sales (responsibility).This particular deal would give you the opportunity to move up inthe sales force (job goal) because of the new marketyour company wants to penetrate (organization vision).And that would get you closer to the way you want tobe living, both financially and professionally (life).Or, from the other direction, you've decidedthat you want to be your own boss and unlock some ofyour unique assets and talents in a particular area t h a tresonates with you (life). So you create a business f o ryourself (vision), with some short-term key operational objec-tives (job goal). That gives you some critical roles you need tofulfill to get it rolling (responsibility), with some immediateoutcomes to achieve (projects). On each of those projects you'llhave things you need to do, as soon as you can do them (nextactions).The healthiest approach for relaxed control and inspiredproductivity is to manage all the levels in a balanced fashion. Atany of these levels, it's critical to identify all the open loops, all theincompletions, and all the commitments that you have right now,as best you can. Without an acceptance and an objective assess-ment of what's true in the present, it's always difficult to cast offfor new shores. What's on your answering machine? What areyour projects relative to your kids? What are you responsible for inthe office? What's pushing on you to change or attracting you tocreate in the next months or years? These are all open loops inyour psyche, though often it takes deeper and more introspectiveprocesses to identify the bigger goals and subtler inclinations.There is magic in being in the present in your life. I'm always201Your work is todiscover your workand then with allyour heart to giveyourself to it.—PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWOamazed at the power of clear observation simplyabout what's going on, what's true. Finding out theexact details of your personal finances, clarifying t h ehistorical data about the company you're buying, orgetting the facts about who really said what to whomin an interpersonal conflict can be constructive, if notdownright healing.Getting things done, and feeling good about it, means beingwilling to recognize, acknowledge, and appropriately manage allthe things that have your consciousness engaged. Mastering theart of stress-free productivity requires it.Working from the Bottom UpIn order to create productive alignment in your life, you could quitereasonably start with a clarification from the top down. Decide whyyou're on the planet. Figure out what kind of life andwork and life-style would best allow you to fulfill t h a tcontract. What kind of job and personal relationshipswould support that direction? What key things wouldyou need to put in place and make happen right now,and what could you do physically as soon as possible,to kick-start each of those?In truth, you can approach your priorities fromany level, at any time. I always have something that Icould do constructively to enhance my awareness and focus oneach level. I'm never lacking in more visions to elaborate, goals toreassess, projects to identify or create, or actions to decide on. Thetrick is to learn to pay attention to the ones you need to at theappropriate time, to keep you and your systems in balance.Because everything will ultimately be driven by the prioritiesof the level above it, any formulation of your priorities wouldobviously most efficiently begin at the top. For example, if youspend time prioritizing your work and then later discover that it'snot the work you think you ought to be doing, you may have"wasted" time and energy that could have been better spent defin-202The best place tosucceed is whereyou are with whatyou have.—Charles
You're never lackingin opportunities toclarify yourpriorities at anylevel. Pay attentionto which horizon iscalling you.CHAPTER 9 1  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESing the next job you really want. The problem is that without asense of control at the implementation levels (current projects andactions), and without inner trust in your own ability to managethose levels appropriately, trying to manage yourself from the topdown often creates frustration.From a practical perspective, I suggest goingfrom the bottom up instead. I've coached peoplefrom both directions, and in terms of lasting value, Ican honestly say that getting someone in control ofthe details of his or her current physical world, andthen elevating the focus from there, has nevermissed.The primary reason to work from this bottom-up direction is that it clears the psychic decks to b e g i n  w i t h ,allowing your creative attention to focus on the more meaningfuland elusive visions that you may need to challenge yourself toidentify. Also, this particular method has a high degree of flexibil-ity and freedom, and it includes a thinking and organizing prac-tice that is universal and effective no matter what it's focused on.That makes it worth learning, no matter what the actual contentyou're dealing with at the moment may be. Change your mind,and this process will help you adjust with maximum speed. Andknowing that you have that ability will give you permission toplay a bigger game. It's truly empowering.While the "50,000-foot level" is obviously the most i m p o r t a n tcontext within which to set priorities, experience has shown methat when we understand and implement all the levels of workin which we are engaged, especially the runway and 10,000-footlevels, we gain greater freedom and resources to do t he  bi gge rwork that we're all about. Although a bottom-up approach isnot a key conceptual priority, from a practical perspective it'sa critical factor in achieving a balanced, productive, and comfort-able life.203Trying to managefrom the top down,when the bottom isout of control, maybe the leasteffective approach.PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWORunway The first thing to do is make sure your action lists arecomplete, which in itself can be quite a task. Those who focus ongathering and objectifying all of those items discover that thereare many they've forgotten, misplaced, or just not recognized.Aside from your calendar, if you don't have at least fifty nextactions and waiting-fors, including all the agendas for people andmeetings, I would be skeptical about whether you really had all ofthem. If you've followed through rigorously with the steps andsuggestions in part 2, though, you may have them already. If not,and you do want to get this level up-to-date, set aside some timeto work through chapters 4 through 6 in real implementationmode.When you've finished getting this level of control current,you'll automatically have a more grounded sense of immediatepriorities, which is almost impossible to achieve otherwise.10,000 Feet Finalize your "Projects" list. Does ittruly capture all the commitments you have that willrequire more than one action to get done? That willdefine the boundaries of the kind of week-to-weekoperational world you're in and allow you to relaxyour thinking for longer intervals.If you make a complete list of all of the thingsyou want to have happen in your life and work at thislevel, you'll discover that there are actions you needto do that you hadn't realized. Just creating this objective inven-tory will give you a firmer basis on which to make decisions aboutwhat to do when you have discretionary time. Invariably whenpeople get their "Projects" list up-to-date, they discover there areseveral things that could be done readily to move things they careabout forward.Very few people have this clear data defined and available tothemselves in some objective form. Before any discussion aboutwhat should be done this afternoon can take place, this informa-tion must be at hand.204Taking the inventoryof your currentwork at all levelswill automaticallyproduce greaterfocus, alignment,and sense ofpriorities.CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESAgain, if you've been putting into practice the methodologyof Getting Things Done, your "Projects" list will be where it needsto be. For most of our coaching clients, it takes ten to fifteenhours of collecting, processing, and organizing to get to the pointof trusting the thoroughness of their inventory.20,000 Feet This is the level of "current job responsibilities."What are the "hats" you wear? Professionally, this would relate toyour current position and work. Personally, it would include theroles you've taken on in your family, in your community, and ofcourse with yourself as a functioning person.You may have some of these roles already defined andwritten out. If you've recently taken a new position and there'san agreement or contract about your areas of responsibility, that would certainly be a good start. If you've done any kindof personal goal-setting and values-clarifying exercises in thepast and still have any materials you created then, add those to themix.Next I recommend that you make and keep a list called"Areas of Focus." You might like to separate this into "Profes-sional" and "Personal" sublists, in which case you'll want to usethem both equally for a consistent review This is one of the mostuseful checklists you can create for your own self-management. Itwon't require the kind of once-a-week recalibrationthat the "Projects" list will; more likely it will havemeaning on a longer recursion cycle. Depending onthe speed of change in some of the more importantareas of your life and work, this should be used as atrigger for potential new projects every one to threemonths.You probably have somewhere between four and seven keyareas of responsibility in your work, and a similar number person-ally. Your job may include things like staff development, systemsdesign, long-range planning, administrative support, marketing,and scheduling, or responsibility for facilities, fulfillment, quality205If you're not totallysure what your jobis, it will always feeloverwhelming.206PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PAHT TWOcontrol, asset management, and so on. If you're your own busi-ness, your attention will be on many more areas than if you have avery specialized function in a large organization. The rest of yourlife might entail areas of focus such as parenting, p a r t n e r i n g ,church, health, community service, home management, financialmanagement, self-development, creative expression, and so forth.The operational purpose of the "Areas of Focus" list is toensure that you have all your projects and next actions defined, soyou can manage your responsibilities appropriately. If you were tocreate an accounting of those and evaluate them objectively, interms of what you're doing and should be doing, you'll undoubtedlyuncover projects you need to add to your "Projects" list. You may, inreviewing the list, decide that some areas are just fine and are beingtaken care of. Then again, you may realize that something has been"bugging" you in one area and that a project should be created toshore it up. "Areas of Focus" is really just a more abstract and refinedversion of the "Triggers" list we covered earlier.Every client I have coached in the last twenty years hasuncovered at least one important gap at this level of discussion.For instance, a common "hat" a manager or executive wears is"staff development." Upon reflection, most realize they need to adda project or two in that area, such as "Upgrade our performance-review process."A discussion of "priorities" would have to incorporate all ofthese levels of current agreements between yourself and others. Ifyou get this "job description" checklist in play and keep it current,you'll probably be more relaxed and in control than most peoplein our culture. It will certainly go a long way toward moving youfrom hope to trust as you make the necessary on-the-run choicesabout what to do.30,000 to 50,000+ Feet Whereas the three lower levels havemostly to do with the current state of things—your actions, proj-ects, and areas of responsibility—from here up the factors of thefuture and your direction and intentions are primary. There is stillCHAPTER 9  I  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESan inventory to take at these plateaus, but it's moreabout "What is true right now about where I'vedecided I'm going and how I'm going to get there?"This can range from one-year goals in your job("30,000 feet") to a three-year vision for your careerand personal net worth ("40,000 feet") to intuitingyour life purpose and how to maximize its expression("50,000+ feet").I'm blending the three uppermost levels together herebecause situations often can't easily be pigeonholed into one oranother of these categories. Also, since Getting Things Done ismore about the art of implementation than about how to definegoals and vision, I won't offer a rigorous examination here. But byits very nature this investigation can broach potentially deep andcomplex arenas, which could include business strategy, organiza-tion development, career planning, and life direction and values.For our purposes, the focus is on capturing what motivatorsexist for you in current reality that determine the inventory ofwhat your work actually is, right now. Whether your directionsand goals should be changed—based on deeper thinking, analysis,and intuition—could be another discussion. Even so, there areprobably some things you can identify right now that can helpyou get current in your own thinking about your work and what'simportant in it.If you were to intuitively frame a picture of what you thinkyou might be doing twelve to eighteen months from now, or whatthe nature of your job will look like at that point, what would thattrigger? At this level, which is subtler, there may be things person-ally you need to let go of, and people and systems that may needto be developed to allow the transition. And as the job itself is amoving target, given the shifting sands of the professional worldthese days, there may need to be projects defined to ensure via-bility of the outputs in your area.In the personal arena, this is where you would want to con-sider things like: "My career is going to stagnate unless I assert my207When you're notsure where you'regoing, you'll neverknow when enoughis enough.208PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOown goals more specifically to my boss (or my boss's boss)." Or"What new things are my children going to be doing next year,and what do I need to do differently because of that?" Or "Whatpreparation do I need to ensure that I can deal with this healthproblem we've just uncovered?"Through a longer scope you might assess: How is your careergoing? How is your personal life moving along? What i s  y o u rorganization doing relative to changes in the environment, andwhat impact does that have on you? These are the one-to-five-year-horizon questions that, when I ask them, elicit different andimportant kinds of answers from everyone.Not long ago I coached someone in a large internationalbank who, after a few months of implementing this methodologyand getting control of his day-to-day inventory of work, decidedthe time was right to invest in his own start-up high-tech firm.The thought had been too intimidating for him to address ini-tially, but working from the "runway level" up made it much moreaccessible and a natural consequence of thinking at this horizon.If you're involved in anything that has a future of longer thana year (marriage, kids, a career, a company, an art form), you woulddo well to think about what you might need to be doing to man-age things along that vector.Questions to ask yourself here are:• What are the longer-term goals and objectives in myorganization, and what projects do I need to have in placerelated to them to fulfill my responsibilities?• What longer-term goals and objectives have I set for myself,and what projects do I need to have in place to make themhappen?• What other significant things are happening that could affectmy options about what you I'm doing?CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICESHere are some examples of the kinds of issues that show upat this level of conversation:• The changing nature of your job, given the shifting priorities ofthe company. Instead of managing the production of your owntraining programs in-house, you're going to outsource them tovendors.• The direction in which you feel you need to move in yourcareer. You see yourself doing a different kind of job a yearfrom now, and you need to make a transition out of the oneyou have while exploring the options for a transfer orpromotion.• The organization direction, given globalization and expansion.You see a lot of major international travel looming on thehorizon for you, and given your life-style preferences, you needto consider how to readjust your career plans.• Life-style preferences and changing needs. As your kids getolder, your need to be at home with them is diminishing, andyour interest in investment and retirement planning is growing.At the topmost level of thinking, you'll need to ask some ofthe ultimate questions. Why does your company exist? Why doyou exist? What is the core DNA of your existence, personallyand/or organizationally, that drives your choices. This is the "bigpicture" stuff with which hundreds of books and gurus and mod-els are devoted to helping you grapple."Why?": this is the great question with which we all struggle.You can have all the other levels of your life and work ship-shape, defined, and organized to a T. Still, if you're the slightestbit off course in terms of what at the deepest level you want or arecalled to be doing, you're going to be uncomfortable.209210PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWOGetting Priority Thinking Off Your MindTake at least a few minutes, if you haven't already done so, to jotdown some informal notes about things that occurred t o  y o uwhile you've been reading this chapter. Whatever popped intoyour mind at these more elevated levels of your inner radar, writeit down and get it out of your head.Then process those notes. Decide whether what you wrotedown is something you really want to move on or not. If not,throw the note away, or put it on a "Someday/Maybe" list or in afolder called "Dreams and Goals I Might Get Around to at SomePoint." Perhaps you want to continue accumulating more of thiskind of future thinking and would like to do the exercise withmore formality—for example, by drafting a new business planwith your partners, designing and writing out your idea of adream life with your spouse, creating a more specific career mapfor the next three years for yourself, or just getting a personalcoach who can lead you through those discussions and thoughtprocesses. If so, put that outcome on your "Projects" list, anddecide the next action. Then do it, hand it off to get done, or putthe action reminder on the appropriate list.With that done, you may want to turn your focus to develop-mental thinking about specific projects that have been identifiedbut not fleshed out as fully as you'd like. You'll want to ensure thatyou're set up for that kind of "vertical" processing.Getting Projects Under ControlCHAPTERS 4 THROUGH 9 have given you all the tricks and methods youneed to clear your head and make intuitive choices about what todo when. That's the horizontal level—what needs your attentionand action across the horizontal landscape of your life. The lastpiece of the puzzle is the vertical level—the digging deep and pie-in-the-sky thinking that can leverage your creative brainpower.That gets us back to refining and energizing our project planning.The Need for More Informal PlanningAfter years of working with thousands of professionals down inthe trenches, I can safely say that virtually all of us could be doingmore planning, more informally and more often, about our proj-ects and our lives. And if we did, it would relieve a lot of pressureon our psyches and produce an enormous amount of creative out-put with minimal effort.I've discovered that the biggest improvement opportunity inplanning does not consist of techniques for the highly elaborateand complex kinds of project organizing that professional projectmanagers sometimes use (like GANTT charts). Most of the peo-ple who need those already have them, or at least have access tothe training and software required to learn about them. The realneed is to capture and utilize more of the creative, proactivethinking we do—or could do.211PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOThe major reason for the lack of this kind of effective value-added thinking is the dearth of systems for managing the poten-tially infinite amount of detail that could show upas a result. This is why my approach tends to bebottom-up. If you feel out of control with your cur-rent actionable commitments, you'll resist focusedplanning. An unconscious pushback occurs. As youbegin to apply these methods, however, you may findthat they free up enormous creative and constructivethinking. If you have systems and habits ready toleverage your ideas, your productivity can expand exponentially.In chapter 3, I covered in some detail the five phases of proj-ect planning that take something from the idea stage into physicalreality.What follows is a compilation of practical tipsand techniques to facilitate the natural, informalplanning processes I recommend. Although thesesuggestions are all based on common sense, they'renot followed nearly as frequently as they could be.Put them to use whenever and as often as you can,instead of saving up your thinking for big formalmeetings.
212Which Projects Should You Be Planning?Most of the outcomes you have identified for your "Projects" listwill not need any kind of front-end planning, other than the sortyou do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come up with a nextaction on them. The only planning needed for "Get carinspected," for example, would be to decide to check the phonebook for the nearest inspection location and call and set up a time.There are two types of projects, however, that deserve at leastsome sort of planning activity: (1) those that still have your atten-tion even after you've determined their next actions, and (2) thoseThe middle ofevery successfulproject looks like adisaster.—RosabethMoss
You need to set upsystems and tricksthat get you to thinkabout your projectsand situations morefrequently, moreeasily, and in moredepth.CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROLabout which potentially useful ideas and supportive d e t a i l  j us tshow up.The first type—the projects that you know have other thingsabout them that must be decided on and organized—will need amore detailed approach than just identifying a next action. Forthese you'll need a more specific application of one or more of theother four phases of the natural planning model: purpose andprinciples, vision/outcome, brainstorming, and/or organizing.The second type—the projects for which ideas just show up,ad hoc, on a beach or in a car or in a meeting—need to have anappropriate place into which these associated ideas can be cap-tured. Then they can reside there for later use as needed.Projects That Need Next Actions About PlanningThere are probably a few projects you can think of right now, offthe top of your head, that you know you want to get more objecti-fied, fleshed out, and under control. Perhaps you have an impor-tant meeting coming up and you know you have to prepare anagenda and materials for it. Or you've just inherited the job ofcoordinating the annual associates' conference, and you've got toget it organized as soon as possible so you can start delegating sig-nificant pieces. Or you've got to clarify a job description for a newposition on your team to give to Human Resources. If you haven'tdone it already, get a next action now that will start the planningprocess for each of these, and put it on the appropriate action list.Then proceed with further planning steps.Typical Planning StepsThe most common types of planning-oriented actions will beyour own brainstorming and organizing, setting up meetings, andgathering information.Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attentionright now will require you to do your own free-form thinking; thisis especially true of those for which you were not clear about what213PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWOthe next action would be when you made that decision. Theseshould all have a next action, such as "Draft ideas re X."You need to decide where and how you want to do thataction, in order to know which action list to put it on. Do you dothis kind of thinking best on a computer, or by hand-writing yourthoughts on paper? I may choose either medium, depending onwhat my intuition tells me. For me this next action would goeither on my "At Computer" list or on "Anywhere" (because I candraw mind-maps wherever I am, as long as I have pen and paper).Organizing You may have some projects for which you havealready collected notes and miscellaneous support materials, andyou just need to sort through them and get them into a more struc-tured form. In this case, your next action would likely be "OrganizeProject X notes." If you have to be in your office to do that(because that's where the files are, and you don't want to carrythem around), that action should go on your "At Office" action list.If you're carrying the project notes around with you in a folder, orin a portable organizer or on a laptop, then the "Organize . . . "action would go on an "Anywhere" or "Misc." action list if you'regoing to do it by hand, or on "At Computer" if you're going to use aword processor, outliner, or project-planning software.One of the greatestblocks to organi-zational productivityis the lack ofdecision by a seniorperson about thenecessity of a meet-ing, and with whom,to move an im-portant issueforward.Setting Up Meetings Often, progress will be madeon project thinking when you set up a meeting withthe people you'd like to have involved in the brain-storming. That usually means sending an e-mail tothe whole group or to an assistant to get it calen-dared, or making a phone call to the first person tonail down a time.Gathering Information Sometimes the next task onproject thinking is to gather more data. Maybe youneed to talk to someone to get his or her input ("CallBill re his thoughts on the managers' meeting"). Or214CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROLyou need to look through the files you just inherited from lastyear's conference ("Review Associate Conference archive files").Or you want to surf the Web to get a sense of what's happening"out there" on a new topic you're exploring ("R&D search firmsfor sales executives").Random Project ThinkingDon't lose any ideas about projects that could potentially be use-ful. Many times you'll think of something you don't want to forgetwhen you're a place that has nothing to do with the project. You'redriving to the store, for example, and you think of a great way thatyou might want to start off the next staff meeting. Or you're stir-ring the spaghetti sauce in the kitchen and it occurs to you thatyou might want to give out nice tote bags to participants in theupcoming conference. Or you're watching the evening news whenyou suddenly remember another key person you might want toinclude in the advisory council you're putting together.If these aren't specifically next actions that can go directly onyour action lists, you'll still need to capture and organize themsomewhere that makes sense. Of course the most critical tools forensuring that nothing gets lost is your collection system—yourin-basket, pad, and paper (or equivalents) at work and at home,and in a portable version (an index card) while you're out andabout. You need to hold all your ideas until you later decide whatto do with them.Tools and Structures That SupportProject ThinkingNo matter at what level project ideas show up, it's great to havegood tools always close at hand for capturing them as they occur.Once they've been captured, it's useful to have access to themwhenever you need to refer to them.215PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOThinking ToolsOne of the great secrets to getting ideas and increasing your pro-ductivity is utilizing the function-follows-form phenomenon—great tools can trigger good thinking. (I've come upwith some of my most productive thoughts whenplaying with my Palm organizer in an airport, wait-ing for a flight!)If you aren't writing anything down, it'sextremely difficult to stay focused on anything formore than a few minutes, especially if you're by your-self. But when you utilize physical tools to keep yourthinking anchored, you can stay engaged construc-tively for hours.Writing InstrumentsKeep good writing tools around all the time so you never have anyunconscious resistance to thinking due to not havinganything to capture it with. If I don't have some-thing to write with, I can sense that I'm not as com-fortable letting myself think about projects andsituations.Conversely, I have done some great thinkingand planning at times just because I wanted to usemy nice-looking, smooth-writing ballpoint pen! Youmay not be inspired by cool gear like I am, but if youare, do yourself a favor and invest in quality writingtools.I also suggest that you keep nice ballpoint pens at the sta-tions where you're likely to want to take notes—particularly nearthe phones around your house.
216Luck affectseverything. Letyour hook alwaysbe cast; in thestream where youleast expect it therewill be a fish.—
Function oftenfollows form. Giveyourself a contextfor capturingthoughts, andthoughts will occurthat you don't yetknow you have.CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROLPaper and PadsIn addition to writing tools, you should always have functionalpads of paper close at hand. Legal pads work well because you caneasily tear off pages with ideas and notes and tossthem into your in-basket until you get a chance toprocess them. Also you will often want to keep someof your informal mind-maps, and you can put thoseseparate pieces of paper in appropriate file folderswithout having to rewrite them.Easels and WhiteboardsIf you have room for them, whiteboards and/or easel pads are veryfunctional thinking tools to use from time to time. They give youplenty of space on which to jot down ideas, and it can be useful tokeep them up in front of you for while, as you incu-bate on a topic. Whiteboards are great to have on awall in your office and in meeting rooms, and thebigger the better. If you have children, I recommendthat you install one in their bedrooms (I wish I'dgrown up with the encouragement to have as manyideas as I could!). Be sure to keep plenty of fresh markers on hand;it's frustrating to want to start writing on a whiteboard and findthat all the markers are dry and useless.Whenever two or more people are gathered for a meeting,someone should start writing somewhere where the other(s) cansee. Even if you erase your thoughts after a few minutes, just theact of writing them down facilitates a constructive t h i n k i n gprocess like nothing else. (I've found it immensely helpful at timesto draw informal diagrams and notes on paper tablecloths, placemats, or even napkins in restaurants, if I didn't have my own padof paper at hand.)217Where is yourclosest pad? Keep itcloser.
How do I knowwhat I think, untilI hear what I say?—E. M. ForsterPRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWOThe ComputerMany times I like to think on my laptop, in my word processor.There are so many things I might want to do later on with mythinking, and it feels terrific to already have it in some digitalform for later editing and cutting and pasting intovarious other applications. Once I've booted up andthe screen is ready in front of me, I find that thinkingjust automatically starts to happen. This is anothergood reason to ensure that your typing and keyboardskills are sufficient to make engaging with the computer at leasteasy, if not downright fun.The Support StructuresIn addition to good tools ubiquitously at hand, it is productive tohave accessible formats into which project thinking can be cap-tured. Much as a pen and paper in front of you supports brain-storming, having good tools and places for organizing projectdetails facilitates the more linear planning that many projectsneed.Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as NeededA good general-reference filing system, right at hand and easy touse, is not only critical to manage the general workflow process,but highly functional for project thinking as well. Often a projectbegins to emerge when it's triggered by relevant data, notes, andmiscellaneous materials, and for this reason, you'll want to createa folder for a topic as soon as you have something to put in it. Ifyour filing system is too formal (or nonexistent), you'll probablymiss many opportunities to generate a project focus sufficientlyearly. As soon as you return from that first meeting with your ini-tial notes about a topic that has just emerged on the horizon, cre-ate a file and store them in it right away (after you have gleanedany next actions, of course).Many times, in coaching clients, I find that the mere act of218Leverage yourcomputer as a thinkstation.CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROLcreating a file for a topic into which we can organize randomnotes and potentially relevant materials gives them a significantlyimproved sense of control. It's a way of physically, visibly, and psy-chologically getting their "arms around it."If you like to work with a loose-leaf notebook orplanner, it's good to keep an inventory of fresh notepaper or graph paper that you can use to set up a pageon a theme or project as it shows up. While someprojects may later deserve a whole tabbed section oreven an entire notebook of their own, they don't startout that way. And most of your projects may needonly a page or two to hold the few ideas you need totrack.Software ToolsSoftware is in one sense a dark black hole to explore in search ofgood "project management" tools. For the most part, the applica-tions that are specifically designed for project organizing are waytoo complex, with too much horsepower to really be functional for98 percent of what most people need to manage. They're appro-priate only for the very small percentage of the professional worldthat actually needs them. The rest of us usually find bits andpieces of applications more informal and project-friendly. As I'venoted, I have never seen any two projects that needed the sameamount of detailing and structure to get them under control. So itwould be difficult to create any one application that would sufficefor the majority.Digital Outlining Most of what anyone needs to structure hisor her thinking about projects can be found in any kind of ap-plication that has a simple hierarchical outlining function. Iused to use a Symantec program called Grandview, and now Ioften use Microsoft Word for just this kind of project planning.Here's a piece of an outline I created for one of our own planningsessions:219If you don't have agood system forfiling bad ideas, youprobably don't haveone for filing goodones, either.220
The great thing about outlining applications is that they canbe as complex or as simple as required. There are numerous soft-ware programs that provide this kind of basic hierarchical struc-turing. The trick is to find one that you feel comfortable with, soyou can rapidly get familiar with how to insert headings and sub-headings and move them around as needed. Until you can stopfocusing on how to use the program, you'll resist booting it up andusing it to think and organize.It doesn't really matter where you put this kind of thinking,so long as it's easily accessible so you can input and review it asneeded.Brainstorming Applications Several applications have beendeveloped specifically to facilitate the brainstorming process."Inspiration" was one, based on the mind-mapping techniques ofPRACTICINCHAPTER 10  I  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROLTony Buzan. It had some useful features, but me, I've gone backto paper and cool pen for the kind of rapid, informal thinking Iusually need to do.The problem with digitizing brainstorming is that for themost part we don't need to save what we brainstorm in the way webrainstormed it—the critical thing is the conclusions wedevelopfrom that raw thinking. The slick brainstorming-capture tools,like electronic whiteboards and digital handwriting-copying gear,ultimately will probably not be as successful as the manufacturershoped. We don't need to save creative thinking so much as we dothe structures we generate from it. There are significant differ-ences among collecting and processing and organizing, and dif-ferent tools are usually required for them. You might as well dumpideas into a word processor.Project-Planning Applications As I've mentioned, most project-planning software is too rigorous for the majority of the projectthinking and planning we need to do. Over the years I've seenthese programs more often tried and discontinued than utilized asa consistent tool. When they're used successfully, they're usuallyhighly customized to fit very specific requirements for the com-pany or the industry.I anticipate that less structured and more functional appli-cations will emerge in the coming years, based on the ways wenaturally think and plan. Until then, best stick with some goodand simple outliner.Attaching Digital NotesIf you are using a digital organizer, much of the project planningyou need to capture outside your head can in fact be satisfactorilymanaged in an attached note field. If you have the project itself asan item on a list on a Palm, or as a task in Microsoft Outlook, youcan open the accompanying "Note" section and jot ideas, bulletpoints, and subcomponents of the project. Just ensure that youreview the attachment appropriately to make it useful.221PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWOHow Do I Apply All This in My World?Just as your "Next Actions" lists need to be up-to-date, so,too, does your "Projects" list. That done, give yourself a block oftime, ideally between one and three hours, to handleas much of the "vertical" thinking about each projectas you can.At the very least, right now or as soon as possi-ble, take those few of your projects that you have themost attention on or interest in right now and dosome thinking and collecting and organizing onthem, using whatever tools seem most appropriate.Focus on each one, one at a time, top to bottom.As you do, ask yourself, "What about this do I want to know, cap-ture, or remember?"You may just want to mind-map some thoughts on a piece ofpaper, make a file, and toss the paper into it. You may come upwith some simple bullet-point headings to attach as a"note" in your software organizer. Or you could cre-ate a Word file and start an outline on it.The key is to get comfortable with having andusing your ideas. And to acquire the habit of focusingyour energy constructively, on intended outcomesand open loops, before you have to.
222Clear the deck,create a context,and do somecreative projectthinking. You'll thenbe way ahead ofmost people.
Let our advanceworrying becomeadvance thinkingand planning.—Winstonpart3The Power of theKey Principles11The Power of the Collection HabitTHERE'S MUCH MORE to these simple techniques and models than mayappear at first glance. Indeed, they offer a systematic method tokeep your mind distraction-free, ensuring a high level of effi-ciency and effectiveness in your work. That in itself would be suf-ficient reason to implement these practices.But there are even greater implications for the fundamentalprinciples at work here. What follows in the next three chaptersis an accounting of my experience, over the last twenty years,of the subtler and often more profound effects that can tran-spire from the implementation of these basic principles. Thelonger-term results can have a significant impact on you as anindividual, and they can positively affect larger organizational cul-tures as well.When people with whom you interact notice that withoutfail you receive, process, and organize in an airtight manner theexchanges and agreements they have with you, they begin to trustyou in a unique way. Such is the power of capturing placeholdersfor anything that is incomplete or unprocessed in your life. Itnoticeably enhances your mental well-being and improves thequality of your communications and relationships, both person-ally and professionally.
225226THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEThe Personal BenefitHow did it feel to go through the collecting and downloadingactivity? Most people say it feels so bad, and yet feels so good.How can that be?If you're like most people who go through the full collec-tion process, you probably felt some form of anxiety. Descriptiveterms like "overwhelmed," "panic," "frustration," "fatigue," and"disgust" tend to come up when I ask seminar participants todescribe their emotions in going through a minor version of thisprocedure. And is there anything you think you've procrastinatedon in that stack? If so, you have guilt automatically associatedwith it—"I could have, should have, ought to have (before now)done this."At the same time, did you experience any sense of release, orrelief, or control as you were did the drill? Most people say yes,indeed. How does that happen? Totally opposite emotional statesshowing up as you're doing a single exercise, almost at the sametime—anxiety and relief; overwhelmed and in control. What'sgoing on here?When you understand the source of your negative feelingsabout all your stuff, you'll discover, as I did, the way to get rid ofthem. And if you experienced any positive feelings from collect-ing your stuff, you actually began the process of eliminating thenegativity yourself.The Source of the Negative FeelingsWhere do the not-so-good feelings come from? Too much to do?No, there's always too much to do. If you felt bad simply becausethere was more to do than you could do, you'd never get rid of thatfeeling. Having too much to do is not the source of the negativefeeling. It comes from a different place.How have you felt when someone broke an agreement withCHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABITyou? Told you they would meet you Thursday at 4:00 P.M. and nevershowed or called? How did that feel? Frustrating, I imagine. Theprice people pay when they break agreements in the world is the dis-integration of trust in the relationship—a negativeconsequence.But what are all those things in your in-basket?Agreements you've made with yourself. Your negativefeelings are simply the result of breaking those agree-ments—they're the symptoms of disintegrated self-trust. If you tell yourself to draft a strategic plan, whenyou don't do it, you'll feel bad. Tell yourself to get orga-nized, and if you fail to, welcome to guilt and frustra-tion. Resolve to spend more time with your kids anddon't—voila! anxious and overwhelmed.How Do You Prevent Broken Agreements with Yourself?If the negative feelings come from broken agreements, you havethree options for dealing with them and eliminating the negativeconsequences:• Don't make the agreement.• Complete the agreement.• Renegotiate the agreement.All of these can work to get rid of the unpleasant feelings.Don't Make the AgreementIt probably felt pretty good to take a bunch of your old stuff,decide that you weren't going to do anything with it, and just tossit into the trash. One way to handle an incompletion in yourworld is to just say no!You'd lighten up if you would just lower your standards.If you didn't care so much about things being up to a certain227The sense ofanxiety and guiltdoesn't come fromhaving too much todo; it's theautomatic result ofbreakingagreements withyourself.THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREElevel—your parenting, your school system, your team's morale, thesoftware code—you'd have fewer things to do.*I doubt you're going to lower your standards. But once youreally understand what it means, you'll probably make feweragreements. I know I did. I used to make a lot of them, just to winpeople's approval. When I realized the price I was paying on theback end for not keeping those agreements, I became a lot moreconscious about the ones I made. One insurance executive Iworked with described the major benefit he derived from imple-menting this system: "Previously I would just tell everyone, 'Sure,I'll do it,' because I didn't know how much I really had to do. Nowthat I've got the inventory clear and complete, just to maintain myintegrity I have had to say, 'No, I can't do that, I'm sorry.' Theamazing thing is that instead of being upset with myrefusal, everyone was impressed by my discipline!"Another client, an entrepreneur in the personalcoaching business, recently told me that making aninventory of his work had eliminated a huge amountof worry and stress from his life. The discipline ofputting everything he had his attention on into hisin-basket caused him to reconsider what he reallywanted to do anything about. If he wasn't willing to toss a noteabout it into "in," he just let it go!I consider that very mature thinking. One of the best thingsabout this whole method is that when you really take the respon-sibility to capture and track what's on your mind, you'll thinktwice about making commitments internally that you don't reallyneed or want to make. Not being aware of all you have to do is
228*It has been a popular concept in the self-help world that focusing on your val-ues will simplify your life. I contend the opposite: the overwhelming amount ofthings that people have to do comes from their values. Values are critical ele-ments for meaning and direction. But don't kid yourself—the more you focuson them, the more things you're likely to feel responsible for taking on. Yourvalues may make it easier for you to make decisions, but don't think they'llmake things any simpler.Maintaining anobjective inventoryof your work makesit much easier tosay no withintegrity.CHAPTER 11  I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABITmuch like having a credit card for which you don't know the bal-ance or the limit—it's a lot easier to be irresponsible.Complete the AgreementOf course, another way to get rid of the negative feelings aboutyour stuff is to just finish it and be able to mark it off as done. Youactually love to do things, as long as you get the feel-ing that you've completed something. If you've begunto complete less-than-two-minute actions as theysurface in your life, I'm sure you can attest to the psy-chological benefit. Most of my clients feel fantasticafter just a couple of hours of processing their piles,just because of how many things they accomplishusing the two-minute rule.One of your better weekends may be spent just finishing up alot of little errands and tasks that have accumulated around yourhouse and in your personal life. Invariably when you capture allthe open loops, little and big, and see them on a list in front ofyou, some part of you will be inspired (or creatively disgusted orintimidated enough) to go knock them off the list.We all seem to be starved for a win. It's great to satisfythat by giving yourself doable tasks you can start and finisheasily.Have you ever completed something that wasn't initially on alist, so you wrote it down and checked it off? Then you knowwhat I mean.There's another issue here, however. Howwould you feel if your list and your stack weretotally—and successfully—completed? You'd proba-bly be bouncing off the ceiling, full of creative energy.Of course, within three days, guess what you'd have?Right—another list, and probably an even biggerone! You'd feel so good about finishing all your stuff you'd likelytake on bigger, more ambitious things to do.Not only that, but if you have a boss, what do you think he or229Out of the strain ofthe doing, into thepeace of the done.—-Julia LouisWoodruff
It's a lot easierto completeagreements whenyou know whatthey are.THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEshe is going to do, after noticing the high levels of competencyand productivity you're demonstrating? Right again—give youmore things to do! It's the catch-22 of professional development:the better you get, the better you'd better get.So, since you're not going to significantly lower your stan-dards, or stop creating more things to do, you'd better get com-fortable with the third option, if you want to keep from stressingyourself out.Renegotiate Your AgreementSuppose I'd told you I would meet you Thursday at 4:00 P.M.,but after I made the appointment, my world changed. Now, givenmy new priorities, I decide I'm not going to meet you Thursdayat four. But instead of simply not showing up, what had I betterdo, to maintain the integrity of the relationship? Correct—calland change the agreement. A renegotiated agreement is not abroken one.Do you understand yet why getting all yourstuff out of your head and in front of you makes youfeel better? Because you automatically renegotiateyour agreements with yourself when you look atthem, think about them, and either act on them thatvery moment or say, "No, not now." Here's the prob-lem: it's impossible to renegotiate agreements withyourself that you can't remember you made!The fact that you can't remember an agreementyou made with yourself doesn't mean that you're notholding yourself liable for it. Ask any psychologisthow much of a sense of past and future that part of your psychehas, the part that was storing the list you dumped: zero. It's allpresent tense in there. That means that as soon as you tell yourselfthat you should do something, if you file it only in your short-term memory, there's a part of you that thinks you should bedoing it all the time. And that means that as soon as you've givenyourself two things to do, and filed them only in your head,230It is the act offorgiveness thatopens up the onlypossible way tothink creativelyabout the future atall.—FatherCHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABITyou've created instant and automatic stress and failure, becauseyou can't do them both at the same time.If you're like most people, you've probably got some storagearea at home—maybe a garage that you told yourself a while back(maybe even six years ago!) you ought to clean and organize. If so,there's a part of you that likely thinks you should've been cleaningyour garage twenty-four hours a day for the past six years! Nowonder people are so tired! And have you heard that little voiceinside your own mental committee every time you walk by yourgarage? "Why are we walking by the garage?! Aren't we supposedto be cleaning it!?" Because you can't stand that whining, naggingpart of yourself, you never even go in the garage anymore if youcan help it. If you want to shut that voice up, you ha ve  t hr e eoptions for dealing with your agreement with yourself:1|    L o w e r  y o u r  s t a n d a r d s  a b o u t  y o u r  g a r a g e  ( y o u  m ay have donethat already). "So I have a crappy garage . .. who cares?"2 |   Keep the agreement—clean the garage.3 |   At least put "Clean garage" on a "Someday/Maybe" list.Then, when you review that list weekly and you see thatitem, you can tell yourself, "Not this week." The next timeyou walk by your garage, you won't hear a thing internally,other than "Ha! Not this week."I'm quite sincere about this. It seems that there's a part of ourpsyche that doesn't know the difference between an agreementabout cleaning the garage and an agreement about buying a com-pany. In there, they're both just agreements—kept or broken. Ifyou're holding something only internally, it will be a brokenagreement if you're not moving on it in the moment.The Radical Departure from Traditional Time ManagementThis method is significantly different from traditional time-management training. Most of those models leave you with theimpression that if something you tell yourself to do isn't that231232THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREEimportant, then it's not that important—to track, manage, or dealwith. But in my experience that's inaccurate, at least in terms ofhow a less-than-conscious part of us operates. It is how our con-scious mind operates, however, so every agreement must be madeconscious. That means it must be captured, objectified, andreviewed regularly in full conscious awareness so that you can putit where it belongs in your self-management arena. If that doesn'thappen, it will actually take up a lot more psychic energy than itdeserves.In my experience, anything that is held only in "psychicRAM" will take up either more or less attention than it deserves.The reason to collect everything is not that everything is equallyimportant, it's that it's not. Incompletions, uncollected, take on adull sameness in the sense of the pressure they create and theattention they tie up.How Much Collection Is Required?You'll feel better collecting anything that you haven't collected yet.When you say to yourself, "Oh, that's right, I need to get butternext time I'm at the store," and you write it on your grocery list,you'll feel better. When you remember, "I've got to call my bankerabout the trust fund," and you write that down someplace whereyou know you'll see it when you're at a phone, you'll feel better.But there will be a light-year's difference when you know youhave it all.When will you know how much you have left in your head tocollect? Only when there's nothing left. If some part of you is evenvaguely aware that you don't have it all, you can't really know whatpercentage you have collected. How will you know when there'snothing left? When nothing else shows up as a reminder in yourmind.This doesn't mean that your mind will be empty. If you'reconscious, your mind will always be focusing on something. But ifit's focusing on only one thing at a time, without distraction,you'll be in your "zone."CHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABITI suggest that you use your mind to think about things, ratherthan think of them. You want to be adding value as you thinkabout projects and people, not simply reminding yourself theyexist. To fully realize that more productive place, you will need tocapture it all. It takes focus and a change of habit to train yourselfto recognize and download even the smallest agreements withyourself as they're created in your mind. Doing the c o l l e c t i o nprocess as fully as you can, and then incorporating the behavior ofcapturing all the new things as they emerge, will be empoweringand productive.When Relationships and OrganizationsHave the Collection HabitWhat happens when everyone involved on a team—in a mar-riage, in a department, on a staff, in a family, in a company—canbe trusted not to let anything slip through the cracks? Frankly,once you've achieved that, you'll hardly think about whether peo-ple are dropping the ball anymore-—there will be much biggerthings to occupy your attention.But if communication gaps are still an issue, there's likelysome layer of frustration and a general nervousness in the culture.Most people feel that without constant baby-sitting and hand-holding, things could disappear in the system and then blow up atany time. They don't realize that they're feeling this becausethey've been in this situation so consistently that they relate toit as if it were a permanent law, like gravity. It doesn't have to bethat way.I have noticed this for years. Good people who haven't incor-porated these behaviors come into my environment, and theystick out like a sore thumb. I've lived with the standards of clearpsychic RAM and hard, clean edges on in-baskets for more thantwo decades now. When a note sits idle in someone's in-basketunprocessed, or when he or she nods "yes, I will" in a conversation233THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEbut doesn't write anything down, my "uh-oh" bell rings. This isunacceptable behavior in my world. There are much bigger fish tofry than worrying about leaks in the system.I need to trust that any request or relevant infor-mation I put on a voice-mail, in an e-mail, in a con-versation, or in a written note will get into the otherperson's system and that it will be processed andorganized, soon, and available for his or her review asan option for action. If the recipient is managingvoice-mails but not e-mail and paper, I have now been hamstrungto use only his or her trusted medium. That should be unaccept-able behavior in any organization that cares about whether thingshappen with the least amount of effort.When change is required, there must be trust that the initia-tives for that change will be dealt with appropriately. Any intactsystem will ultimately be only as good as its weakest link, andoften that Achilles' heel is a key person's dulled responsiveness tocommunications in the system.I especially notice this when I walk around organizationswhere in-baskets are either nonexistent, or overflowing and obvi-ously long unprocessed. These cultures usually suffer from serious"interruptitis" because they can't trust putting communicationsinto the system.Where cultures do have solid systems, down through thelevel of paper, the clarity is palpable. It's hardly even a consciousconcern, and everyone's attention is more focused. The same istrue in families that have instituted in-baskets—for the parents,the children, the nanny, the housekeeper, or anyone e l s e  w i t hwhom family members frequently interact. People often grimacewhen I tell them that my wife, Kathryn, and I put things in eachother's in-baskets, even when we're sitting within a few feet ofeach other; to them it seems "cold and mechanical." Aside frombeing an act of politeness intended to avoid interrupting theother's work in progress, the practice actually fosters more warmthand freedom between us, because mechanical things are being234Bailing water in aleaky boat divertsenergy from rowingthe boat.CHAPTER 11 | THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIThandled in the system instead of tying up our attention in therelationship.Unfortunately, you can't legislate personal systems. Everyonemust have his or her own way to deal with what he orshe has to deal with. You can, however, hold peopleaccountable for outcomes, and for tracking and man-aging everything that comes their way. And you cangive them the information in this book. Then, atleast, they'll have no excuse for letting something f a l lthrough the cracks.This doesn't mean that everyone has to doeverything. I hope I have described a way to relate t oour relatively new knowledge-based world that givesroom for everyone to have a lot more to do than he orshe can do. The critical issue will be to facilitate aconstant renegotiation process with all involved, sothey feel OK about what they're not doing. That'sreal knowledge work, at a more sophisticated level. But there's lit-tle hope of getting there without having bulletproof collectionsystems in play. Remember, you can't renegotiate an a greem entwith yourself that you can't remember you made. And you cer-tainly can't renegotiate agreements with others that you've losttrack of.When groups of people collectively adopt the 100 percentcollection standard, they have a tight ship to sail. It doesn't meanthey're sailing in the right direction, or even that they're on theright ship; it just means that the one they're on, in the directionit's going, is doing that with the most efficient energy it can.
235Organizations mustcreate a culture inwhich it isacceptable thateveryone has moreto do than he or shecan do, and inwhich it is sage torenegotiateagreements aboutwhat everyone isnot doing.The Power of theNext-Action DecisionI HAVE A personal mission to make "What's the next action?" part ofthe global thought process. I envision a world in which no meet-ing or discussion will end, and no interaction cease, without aclear determination of whether or not some action is needed—and if it is, what it will be, or at least who has responsibility for it.I envision organizations adopting a standard that anything thatlands in anyone's "ten acres" will be evaluated for action required,and the resulting decisions managed appropriately. Imagine thefreedom that would allow to focus attention on bigger issues andopportunities.Over the years I have noticed an extraordinaryshift in energy and productivity whenever individu-als and groups installed "What's the next action?" asa fundamental and consistently asked question. Assimple as the query seems, it is still somewhat rare tofind it fully operational where it needs to be.One   of  the   greatest   challenges   you   mayencounter is that once you have gotten used to"What's the next action?" for yourself and thosearound you, interacting with people who aren't ask-ing it can be highly frustrating. It clarifies things soquickly that dealing with people and environments that don't useit can seem nightmarish.We are all accountable to define what, if anything, we arecommitted to make happen as we engage with ourselves and236
When a cultureadopts "What's thenext action?" as astandard operatingquery, there's anautomatic increasein energy,productivity, clarity,and focus.CHAPTER 12  |  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONothers. And at some point, for any outcome that we have an inter-nal commitment to complete, we must make the decision aboutthe next physical action required. There's a great difference, how-ever, between making that decision when things show u p  a n ddoing it when they blow up.The Source of the TechniqueI learned this simple but extraordinary next-action t e c h n i q u etwenty years ago from a longtime friend and management-consulting mentor of mine, Dean Acheson (no relation to theformer secretary of state). Dean had spent many prior years con-sulting with executives and researching what was required to freethe psychic logjams of many of them about projects and situationsthey were involved in. One day he just started picking up eachindividual piece of paper on an executive's desk and forcing him todecide what the very next thing was that he had to do to move itforward. The results were so immediate and so profound for theexecutive that Dean continued for years to perfect a methodologyusing that same question to process the in-basket. Since thenboth of us have trained and coached thousands of people with thiskey concept, and it remains a foolproof technique. It never fails togreatly improve both the productivity and the peace of mind ofthe user to determine what the next physical action is that willmove something forward.Creating the Option of DoingHow could something so simple be so powerful—"What's thenext action?"To help answer that question, I invite you to revisit for amoment your mind-sweep list (see page 113). Or at least to thinkabout all the projects that are probably sitting around in your237238THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I  PART THREEpsyche. Do you have a sense that they haven't been moving alongas consistently and productively as they could be? You'll probablyadmit that yes, indeed, a few have been a little bit "stuck."If you haven't known for sure whether you needed to make acall, send an e-mail, look up something, or buy an item at thestore as the very next thing to move on, it hasn't been gettingdone. What's ironic is that it would likely require only about tenseconds of thinking to figure out what the next action would befor almost everything on your list. But it's ten seconds of thinkingthat most people haven't done about most things on their list.For example, a client will have something like "tires" on alist.I then ask, "What's that about?"He responds, "Well, I need new tires on my car.""So what's the next action?"At that point the client usually wrinkles up his forehead,ponders for a few moments, and expresses his conclusion: "Well, Ineed to call a tire store and get some prices."That's about how much time is required to decide what the"doing" would look like on almost everything. It's just the few sec-onds of focused thinking that most people have not yet doneabout most of their stuff.It will probably be true, too, that the person who needs tireson his car has had that on his radar for quite a while. It's also likelythat he's been at a phone hundreds of times, often with enoughtime and/or energy only to make just such a call. Why didn't hemake it? Because in that state of mind, the last thing in the worldhe felt like doing was considering all his projects, including get-ting tires, and what their next actions were. In those moments hedidn't feel like thinking at all.What he needed was to have already figured those thingsout. If he gets that next-action thinking done, then, when he hap-pens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting, with a phone athand, and his energy at about 4.2 out of 10, he can look at the listof options of things to do and be delighted to see "Call tire storeCHAPTER 12  | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONfor prices" on it. "That's something I can do and com-plete successfully!" he'll think, and then he'll actually bemotivated to make the call, just to experience the "win"of completing something useful in the time and energywindow he's in. In this context he'd be incapable ofstarting a large proposal draft for a client, but he hassufficient resources for punching phone numbers andgetting simple information quickly. It's highly probablethat at some point soon he'll look at the new set of tireson his car and feel on top of the world.Defining what real doing looks like, on the mostbasic level, and organizing placeholder remindersthat we can trust, are master keys to productivityenhancement.These are learnable techniques, and ones that we can con-tinue to get better at.Often even the simplest things are stuck because we haven'tmade a final decision yet about the next action. People in myseminars often have things on their lists like "Get a tune-up forthe car." Is "Get a tune-up" a next action? Not unless you're walk-ing out with wrench in hand, dressed for grease."So, what's the next action?""Uh, I need to take the car to the garage. Oh, yeah, I need tofind out if the garage can take it. I guess I need to call the garageand make the appointment.""Do you have the number?""Darn, no . . .  I don't have the number for the garage. Fredrecommended that garage to me, and I don't havethe number. I knew something was missing in theequation."And that's often what happens with so manythings for so many people. We glance at the project,and some part of us thinks, "I don't quite have all t h epieces between here and there." We know something ismissing, but we're not sure what it is exactly, so we quit.239The secret ofgetting ahead isgetting started.The secret ofgetting started isbreaking yourcomplexoverwhelm ingtasks into smallmanageable tasks,and then startingon the first one.—Mark Twain
Without a nextaction, thereremains apotentially infinitegap between currentreality and what youneed to do.THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREE"So, what's the next action?""I need to get the number. I guess I could get it from Fred.""Do you have Fred's number?""I have Fred's number!"So the next action really is "Call Fred for the number of thegarage."Did you notice how many steps had to be tracked backbefore we actually got to the real next action on this project?That's typical. Most people have many things just like that ontheir lists.Why Bright People Procrastinate the MostIt's really the smartest people who have the highest number ofundecided things in their lives and on their lists. Why is that?Think of how our bodies respond to the images we hold in ourminds. It appears that the nervous system can't tell the differencebetween a well-imagined thought and reality.To prove this to yourself, picture yourself walking i n t o  asupermarket and going over to the brightly lit fruit-and-vegetablesection. Are you there? OK, now go to the citrus bins—oranges,grapefruits, lemons. Now see the big pile of yellow l e m o n s .There's a cutting board and a knife next to them. Take one ofthose big yellow lemons and cut it in half. Smell that citrus smell!It's really juicy, and there's lemon juice trickling ontothe board. Now take a half lemon and cut that in half,so you have a quarter lemon wedge in your hands.OK, now—remember how you did this as a kid?—put that quarter of a lemon in your mouth and biteinto it! Scrunch!If you played along with me, you probablynoticed that  the  saliva  content  in your  mouthincreased at least a bit. Your body was actually trying to processcitric acid! And it was just in your mind.240Bright people havethe capability offreaking out fasterand moredramatically thananyone else.CHAPTER 12  I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONIf your body responds to the pictures you give it, how are youlikely to feel physically when you think about, say, doing yourtaxes? Are you sending yourself "easy," "let's go," completion, suc-cess, and "I'm a winner!" pictures? Probably not. For just that rea-son, what kinds of people would logically be the most resistant tobeing reminded about a project like that—that is, who would pro-crastinate the most? Of course, it would be the most creative,sensitive, and intelligent people! Because their sensi-tivity gives them the capability of producing in theirminds lurid nightmare scenarios about what mightbe involved in doing the project, and all the negativeconsequences that might occur if it weren't done per-fectly! They just freak out in an instant and quit!Who doesn't procrastinate? Often it's the insen-sitive oafs who just take something and start plod-ding forward, unaware of all the things that could gowrong. Everyone else tends to get hung up about allkinds of things.Do my taxes? Oh, no! It's not going to be that easy. It's goingto be different this year, I'm sure. I saw the forms—they look dif-ferent. There are probably new rules I'm going to have to figureout. I might have to read all that damn material. Long form, shortform, medium form? File together, file separate? We'll probablywant to claim deductions, but if we do we'll have to back them up,and that means we'll need all the receipts. Oh, my God—I don'tknow if we really have all the receipts we'd need and what if wedidn't have all the receipts but we claimed the deductions anywayand we got audited? Audited? Oh, no—the IRS—JAIL!!And so a lot of people put themselves in jail, just glancing attheir 1040 tax forms. Because they're so smart, sensitive, and cre-ative. In my many years of coaching individuals, this pattern hasbeen borne out more times than I can count—usually it's thebrightest and most sophisticated folks who have the most stuckpiles, in their offices, homes, and heads. Most of the executives Iwork with have at least several big, complex, and amorphous241I am an old manand have known agreat manytroubles, but mostof them neverhappened.—MarkTHE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEprojects stacked either on a credenza or on a mental shelf. Therealways seem to be hobgoblin thoughts lurking inside them—"Ifwe don't look at or think about the projects, maybethey'll stay quiet!"So what's the solution? There's always having adrink. Numb it out. Dumb it down. Notice whathappens to many people when they get a little alco-hol on the brain. It should drop their energy imme-diately, because it's a depressant; often, though, the energy lifts, atleast initially. Why? The alcohol is depressing something—it'sshutting down the negative self-talk and uncomfortable visionsthat are going on in these folks' minds. Of course my energy willincrease if I stop depressing myself with overwhelming pictures ofnot handling something successfully. But the numb-out solutionsare temporary at best. The "stuff" doesn't go away. And unfortu-nately, when we numb ourselves out, we can't do it selectively—the source of inspiration and enthusiasm and personal energy alsoseems to get numbed.Intelligent Dumbing DownThere is another solution: intelligently dumbing down your brainby figuring out the next action. You'll invariably feel a relieving ofpressure about anything you have a commitment to change or do,when you decide on the very next physical action required tomove it forward. Nothing, essentially, will change inthe world. But shifting your focus to something thatyour mind perceives as a doable, completeable taskwill create a real increase in positive energy, direction,and motivation. If you truly captured all the thingsthat have your attention during the mind-sweep, gothrough the list again now and decide on the singlevery next action to take on every one of them. Noticewhat happens to your energy.You are either attracted or repelled by the thingson your lists; there isn't any neutral territory. You are242Ceasing negativeimaging will alwayscause your energyto increase.
No matter how bigand tough aproblem may be,get rid of confusionby taking one littlestep towardsolution. Dosomething.—GeorgeF.CHAPTER 12  I  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONeither positively drawn toward completing the action or reluctantto think about what it is and resistant to getting involved in it.Often it's simply the next-action decision that makes the differ-ence between the two extremes.In following up with people who have taken myseminars or been coached by my colleagues or me,I've discovered that one of the subtler ways many ofthem fall off the wagon is in letting their action listsgrow back into lists of tasks or subprojects instead ofdiscrete next actions. They're still ahead of most peo-ple because they're actually writing things down, butthey often find themselves stuck, and procrastinat-ing, because they've allowed their action lists to har-bor items like:"Meeting with the banquet committee""Johnny's birthday""Receptionist""Slide presentation"In other words, things have morphed back into "stuff-nessinstead of staying at the action level. There are no clear nextactions here, and anyone keeping a list filled with items like thiswould send his or her brain into overload every time he/shelooked at it.Is this extra work? Is figuring out the nextaction on your commitments additional effort toexpend that you don't need to? No, of course not. Ifyou need to get your car tuned, for instance, you'regoing to have to figure out that next action at somepoint anyway. The problem is that most people wait to do it untilthe next action is "Call the Auto Club for tow truck!!"So when do you think most people really make a lot of theirnext-action decisions about their stuff-—when it shows up, orwhen it blows up? And do you think there might be a difference243Everything on yourlists and in yourstacks is eitherattractive orrepulsive to you—there's no neutralground when itcomes to your stuff.
You can only cureretail but you canprevent wholesale.—Brock ChisolmTHE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I  PART THREEin the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge workon the front end instead of the back? Which do you think is themore efficient way to move through life—decidingnext actions on your projects as soon as they appearon your radar screen and then efficiently groupingthem into categories of actions that you get done incertain uniform contexts, or avoiding thinking aboutwhat exactly needs to be done until it has to be done,then nickel-and-diming your activities as you try tocatch up and put out the fires?That may sound exaggerated, but when I ask groups of peo-ple to estimate when most of the action decisions are made intheir companies, with few exceptions they say, "When thingsblow up." One global corporate client surveyed its populationabout sources of stress in its culture, and the number one com-plaint was the last-minute crisis work consistently promoted byteam leaders who failed to make appropriate decisions on thefront end.
244The Value of a Next-ActionDecision-Making StandardI have had several sophisticated senior executives tell me thatinstalling "What's the next action?" as an operational standard intheir organizations was transformative in terms of measurableperformance output. It changed their culture permanently andsignificantly for the better.Why? Because the question forces clarity, accountability,productivity, and empowerment.ClarityToo many discussions end with only a vague sense that peopleknow what they have decided and are going to do. But withouta clear conclusion that there is a next action, much less what it isAvoiding actiondecisions until thepressure of the lastminute creates hugeinefficiencies andunnecessary stress.CHAPTER 12  | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONor who's got it, more often than not a lot of "stuff" gets left up inthe air.I am frequently asked to facilitate meetings. I've learned thehard way that no matter where we are in the conversation, twentyminutes before the agreed end-time of the discussion I must forcethe question: "So what's the next action here?" In my experience,there is usually twenty minutes' worth of clarifying (and some-times tough decisions) still required to come up with an answer.This is radical common sense—radical because it oftencom-pels discussion at deeper levels than people are comfortable with."Are we serious about this?" "Do we really know what we're doinghere?" "Are we really ready to allocate precious time and resourcesto this?" It's very easy to avoid these more relevant levels of think-ing. What prevents those issues from slipping away into amor-phous "stuff" is forcing the decision about the next action. Somefurther conversation, exploration, deliberation, and negotiationare often needed to put the topic to rest. The world is too unpre-dictable these days to permit assumptions about out-comes: we need to take responsibility for movingthings to clarity.You have to have some experience of this toreally know what I mean here. If you do, you'reprobably saying to yourself, "Yes!" If you're not surewhat I'm talking about, I suggest that in your next meeting withanyone, you end the conversation with the question, "So what'sthe next action here?" Then notice what happens.AccountabilityThe dark side of "collaborative cultures" is the allergy they fosterto holding anyone responsible for having the ball. "Mine oryours?" is unfortunately not in the common vocabulary of manysuch organizations. There is a sense that that would be impolite."We're all in this together" is a worthy sentiment, but seldom areality in the hard-nosed day-to-day world of work. Too many meet-ings end with a vague feeling among the players that something245Talk does not cookrice.—ChineseTHE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEought to happen, and the hope that it's not their personal job tomake it so.The way I see it, what's truly impolite is allowing people towalk away from discussions unclear. Real "togetherness" of agroup is reflected by the responsibility that all take for definingthe real things to do and the specific people assigned to do them,so everyone is freed of the angst of still-undecided actions.Again, if you've been there, you'll know what I'm talkingabout. If you haven't, test it out—take a small risk and ask "Sowhat's the next action on this?" at the end of each discussion pointin your next staff meeting, or in your next "family conversation"around the dinner table.ProductivityOrganizations naturally become more productive when theymodel and train front-end next-action decision-making. For allthe reasons mentioned above, determining the required physicalallocation of resources necessary to make somethinghappen as soon as the outcome has been clarified willproduce more results sooner, and with less effort.Learning to break through the barriers of thesophisticated   creative   thinking   that   can   freezeactivity—that is, the entangled psychic webs wespin—is a superior skill. "Productivity" has beentouted for decades as a desirable thing to improve inorganizations. Anything that can help maximizeoutput will do that. But in the world of knowledgework, all the computers and telecom improvementsand leadership seminars on the planet will make nodifference in this regard unless the individuals involved increasetheir operational responsiveness. And that requires thinkingabout something that lands in your world before you have to.One of the biggest productivity leaks I have seen in someorganizations is the lack of next actions determined for "long-term" projects. "Long-term" does not mean "Someday/Maybe."246There are risks andcosts to a programof action, but theyare far less thanthe long-range 'risks and costs ofcomfortableinaction.—JohnF.CHAPTER 12  I  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISIONThose projects with distant goal lines are still to b edone as soon as possible; "long-term" simply means,"more action steps until it's done," not "no need todecide next actions because the day of reckoning is s ofar away." When every project and open loop in anorganization is being monitored, it's a whole new ballgame.EmpowermentPerhaps the greatest benefit of adopting the next-action approach is that it dramatically increases yourability to make things happen, with a concomitant rise in yourself-esteem and constructive outlook.People are constantly doing things, but usually only whenthey have to, under fire from themselves or others. They get nosense of winning, or of being in control, or of cooperating amongthemselves and with their world. People are starving for thoseexperiences.The daily behaviors that define the things that are incom-plete and the moves that are needed to complete them mustchange. Getting things going of your own accord, before you'reforced to by external pressure and internal stress, b u i l d s  a  f i r mfoundation of self-worth that will spread into every aspect of yourlife. You are the captain of your own ship; the more you act fromthat perspective, the better things will go for you.Asking "What's the next action?" undermines the victimmentality. It presupposes that there is a possibility of change, andthat there is something you can do to make it happen. That is theassumed affirmation in the behavior. And these kinds of "assumedaffirmations" often work more fundamentally to build a positiveself-image than can repeating "I am a powerful, effective person,making things happen in my life!" a thousand times.Is there too much complaining in your culture? The nexttime someone moans about something, try asking, "So what's thenext action?" People will complain only about something that247Productivity willimprove only whenindividuals increasetheir operationalresponsiveness.And in knowledgework, that meansclarifying actions onthe front endinstead of the back.THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES |  PART THREEthey assume could be better than it currently is. The action ques-tion forces the issue. If it can be changed, there's some action thatwill change it. If it can't, it must be considered part ofthe landscape to be incorporated in strategy and tac-tics. Complaining is a sign that someone isn't willingto risk moving on a changeable situation, or won'tconsider the immutable circumstance in his or herplans. This is a temporary and hollow form of self-validation.Although my colleagues and I rarely promoteour work in this way, I notice people really empower-ing themselves every day as we coach them in apply-ing the next-action technique. The light in their eyesand the lightness in their step increase, and a positivespark shows up in their thinking and demeanor. Weare all already powerful, but deciding on and effec-tively managing the physical actions required tomove things forward seems to exercise that power inways that call forward the more positive aspects ofour nature.When you start to make things happen, you really begin tobelieve that you can make things happen. And that makes thingshappen.
248People are alwaysblaming theircircumstances forwhat they are. Idon't believe incircumstances. Thepeople who get onin this world arethe people who getup and look for thecircumstances theywant, and, if theycan't find them,- make them.—George BernardShawThe Power of Outcome FocusingTHE POWER OF directing our mental and imaginative processes tocreate change has been studied and promoted in thousands ofcontexts—from the early "positive thinking" books to recent dis-coveries in advanced neurophysiology.My own interest has been in applying of the principle interms of practical reality: Does it help get things done? And if so,how do we best utilize it in managing the work of our lives? Canwe really use this information in ways that allow us to producewhat we want to have happen with less effort? The answer hasbeen a resounding yes.Focus and the Fast TrackOver the years I have seen the application of the method pre-sented in this book create profound results for people in their day-to-day worlds. As you begin to use it habitually as your primarymeans of addressing all situations—from processing e-mails, tobuying a house or a company, to structuring meetings or havingconversations with your kids—your personal productivity can gothrough the roof.Many of the professionals I have worked with who inte-grated this method now find themselves experiencing enhancedor even new jobs and careers. These processes really work in thearena of the ordinary things we must deal with daily—the stuffof249250THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREEour work. When you demonstrate to yourself and to others anincreasing ability to get things done "in the trenches," you proba-bly won't stay in the same trench for very long.* It's been inspiringfor me to learn and coach others how to deal with the immediaterealities down where the rubber hits the road—and how to tie inthe power of positive imagery to practical experiences in all ourdaily lives.The "fast track" alluded to in the section heading above is abit of misnomer. For some, slowing down, getting out of the squir-rel cage, and taking care of themselves may be the major changeprecipitated by this methodology. The bottom line is it makes youmore conscious, more focused, and more capable of implementingthe changes and results you want, whatever they are."Create a way to regularly spend more time with my daugh-ter" is as specific a project as any, and equally demanding of a nextaction to be determined. Having the vague, gnawing sense thatyou "should" do something about your relationship with yourdaughter, and not actually doing anything, can be a killer. I oftenwork with clients who are willing to acknowledge the real thingsof their lives at this level as "incompletes"—to write them down,define real projects about them, and ensure that next actions aredecided on—until the finish line is crossed. That is real productiv-ity, perhaps in its most awesome manifestation.The Significance of Applied Outcome ThinkingWhat I want to emphasize now is how learning to process thedetails of our work and lives with this clear and consistent system*Of course, the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting ThingsDone are usually already on a self-development track and don't assume thatthey'll be doing the same thing a year from now that they're doing now, any-way. But they love the fact that this method gets them there faster and moreeasily.CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSINGcan affect others and ourselves in significant ways we may notexpect.As I've said, employing next-action decision-making results in clarity, productivity, accountability,and empowerment. Exactly the same results happenwhen you hold yourself to the discipline of identify-ing the real results you want and, more specifically,the projects you need to define in order to producethem.It's all connected. You can't really define theright action until you know the outcome, and your outcome is dis-connected from reality if you're not clear about what you need todo physically to make it happen. You can get at it from eitherdirection, and you must, to get things done.As an expert in whole-brain learning and good friend ofmine, Steven Snyder, put it, "There are only two problems in life:(1) you know what you want, and you don't know how to get it;and/or (2) you don't know what you want." If that's true (and Ithink it is) then there are only two solutions:• Make it up.• Make it happen.This can be construed from the models ofyin/yang, right brain/left brain, creator/destroyer—or whatever equivalent works best for you. Thetruth is, our energy as human beings seems to have adualistic and teleological reality—we create and identify withthings that aren't real yet on all the levels we experience; andwhen we do, we recognize how to restructure our current worldto morph it into the new one, and experience an impetus to makeit so.Things that have your attention need your intentionengaged. "What does this mean to me?" "Why is it here?" "Whatdo I want to have be true about this?" ("What's the successful251Defining specificprojects and nextactions that addressreal quality-of-life issues isproductivity atits best.
We are constantlycreating andfulfilling.THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEoutcome?") Everything you experience as incompletemust have a reference point for "complete."Once you've decide that there is somethingto be changed and a mold to fill, you ask yourself,"How do I now make this happen?" and/or "Whatresources do I need to allocate to make it happen?"("What's the next action?").Your life and work are made up of outcomes andactions. When your operational behavior is groovedto organize everything that comes your way, at alllevels, based upon those dynamics, a deep align-ment occurs, and wondrous things emerge. You be-come highly productive. You make things up, and you make themhappen.
252The Magic of Mastering the MundaneMy clients often wonder how I can sit with them in their offices,often for hours on end, as they empty the drawers of their desksand painstakingly go through the minutiae of stuff that they havelet accumulate in their minds and their physical space. Aside fromthe common embarrassment they feel about the volume of theirirresponsibly dealt-with details, they assume I should be bored totears. Quite the contrary. Much to my own surprise, I find it to besome of the most engaging work I do with -people. I know therelease and relief and freedom that sit on the other side of dealingwith these things. I know that we all need practice and supportand a strong, clear focus to get through them, until we have thebuilt-in standards and behaviors we need to engage with them asthey demand. I know how significant a change these people mayexperience in their relationships with their bosses, their partners,their spouses, their kids, and themselves over the next few hoursand (we hope) days and years.It's not boring. It's some of the best work we do.Life affords nohigher pleasurethan that ofsurmountingdifficulties, passingfrom one step ofsuccess to another,forming newwishes and seeingthem gratified.—Dr.SamuelCHAPTER 13  I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSINGI'm in the focus business. As a consultant and coach,I ask simple questions that often elicit very creativeand intelligent responses from others (and evenmyself!), which can in turn add value to the situationand work at hand. People aren't any smarter afterthey work with me than they were before—they justdirect and utilize their intelligence more productively.What's unique about the practical focus of Getting ThingsDone is the combination of effectiveness and efficiency that thesemethods can bring to every level of your reality. There are lots ofinspirational sources for the high-level "purpose, values, vision"kind of thinking, and many more mundane tools for getting holdof smaller details such as phone numbers and appointments andgrocery lists. The world has been rather barren, however, of prac-tices that relate equally to both levels, and tie them together."What does this mean to me?" "What do I wantto have be true about it?" "What's the next steprequired to make that happen?" These are the corner-stone questions we must answer, at some point, abouteverything. This thinking, and the tools that supportit, will serve you in ways you may not yet imagine.The Power of Natural PlanningThe value of all this natural project planning is that itprovides an integrated, flexible, aligned way to thinkthrough any situation.Being comfortable with challenging the pur-pose of anything you may be doing is healthy and mature. Beingable to "make up" visions and images of success, before the meth-ods are clear, is a phenomenal trait to strengthen. Being willing to253Multilevel Outcome ManagementThechallenge is tomarry high-levelidealistic focus tothe mundaneactivity of life. In theend they require thesame thinking.
An idealist believesthat the short rundoesn't count. Acynic believes thelong run doesn'tmatter. A realistbelieves that whatis done or leftundone in the shortrun determines thelong run.—Sidney].254THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEhave ideas, good or bad, and to express and capture all of themwithout judgments is critical for fully accessing creative intelli-gence. Honing multiple ideas and types of information into com-ponents, sequences, and priorities aimed toward a specificoutcome is a necessary mental discipline. And deciding on andtaking real next actions—actually moving on something in thephysical world—are the essence of productivity.Being able to bring all these ingredients together, w i t happropriate timing and balance, is perhaps the major componentof professional competence for this new millennium. But it's notyet the norm in professional behavior; far from it. It's still a daunt-ing task to apply this awareness to all the aspects of personal andprofessional life. But even when only portions of the model areinserted, tremendous benefit ensues.The feedback I have gotten over the years in my consulting,teaching, and coaching with this model has continued to validatethat even the slightest increase in the use of natural planning canbring significant improvement. To see brainstorming a b o u talmost every aspect of their lives becoming a standard tool formany people is terrific. To hear from executives who have used themodel as a way to frame key meetings and discussions, and havegotten great value from doing that, is gratifying. It all just affirmsthat the way our minds naturally work is the way that we shouldfocus to make anything happen in the physical world.The model is simply the basic principle of determining out-comes and actions for everything we consider to be our work.When those two key focus points become the norm in our day-to-day lives, the baseline for productivity moves to another level.The addition of brainstorming—the most creative means ofexpressing and capturing ideas, perspectives, and details aboutprojects—makes for an elegant set of behaviors for staying relaxedand getting things done.CHAPTER 13  | THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSINGShifting to a Positive Organizational CultureIt doesn't take a big change to increase the productivity standardsof a group. I continually get feedback indicating that with a littleimplementation, this method immediately makes things happenmore quickly and more easily.The constructive evaluation of activities, asset allocations,communications, policies, and procedures against purposes andintended outcomes has become increasingly critical for everyorganization I know of. The challenges to our companies con-tinue to mount, with pressures coming these days from globali-zation, competition, technology, shifting markets, and raisedstandards of performance and production."What do we want to have happen in this meeting?" "Whatis the purpose of this form?" "What would the ideal person forthis job be able to do?" "What do we want to accomplish with thissoftware?" These and a multitude of other, similar questions arestill sorely lacking in many quarters. There's plenty of talk in theBig Meetings that sounds good, but learning to ask "Why are wedoing this?" and "What will it look like when it's done success-fully?" and to apply the answers at the day-to-day operationallevel—that is what will create profound results.Empowerment naturally ensues for individuals as they movefrom complaining and victim modalities into outcomes andactions defined for direction. When that becomes the standard in agroup, it creates significant improvement in the atmosphere as wellas the output. There are enough other problems to be concernedwith; negativity and passive resistance need to continually give wayto a focus on the desired results at the appropriate horizons.The microcosm of how people deal with their in-baskets,e-mail, and conversations with others will be reflected in themacro-reality of their culture and organization. If b a l l s  a r edropped, if decisions about what to do are resisted on the frontend, if not all the open loops are managed responsibly, that will be255THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREEA vision withouta task is but adream, a taskwithout a vision isdrudgery, a visionand a task is thehope of the world.—From a churchinSussex, England,ca.1730magnified in the group, and the culture will sustain astressful fire-and-crisis siege mentality. If, in con-trast, individuals are implementing the principles ofGetting Things Done, the culture will expect andexperience a new standard of high performance.Problems and conflicts will not go away—theyremain inherent as you attempt to change (or main-tain) anything in this world. The operational behav-iors of this book, however, will provide the focus andframework for addressing them in the most produc-tive way.
256ConclusionI HOPE THIS book has been useful—that you have started to reap therewards of getting more done with less effort and stress. And Ireally hope you have tasted the freedom of a "mind like water" andthe release of your creative energies that can come with the appli-cation of these techniques. Those who begin to implement thesemethods always discover there's more here than meets the eye,and you may have begun to experience your own version of that.I'll bet Getting Things Done has validated much of what youalready know and have been doing to some degree all along. Per-haps, though, it will make it much easier for you to apply thatcommon sense more systematically in a world that seems toincreasingly confound us with its intensity and complexity.My intent is not to add more to the plethora of moderntheories and models about how to be successful. I have tried,on the contrary, to define the core methods that don't change withthe times, and which, when applied, always work. Like gravity,when you understand the principle, you can operate a lot moreeffectively, no matter what you're doing. Perhaps this is the Lead-ing Edge of Back to Basics!Getting Things Done is a road map to achieve the positive,relaxed focus that characterizes your most productive state. Iinvite you to use it, like a road map, as a reference tool to get backthere whenever you need to.To consistently stay on course, you'll have to do some things257258CONCLUSIONthat may not be habits yet: keep everything out of your head;decide actions and outcomes when things first emerge on yourradar, instead of later; and regularly review and update the com-plete inventory of open loops of your life and work. I hope by nowyou at least have established a reference point for the value thesebehaviors create. Don't be surprised, though, if it takes a littlewhile to make them automatic. Be patient, and enjoy the process.Here are some final tips for moving forward:• Get your personal physical organization hardware set up. Getyour workstation organized. Get in-baskets. Create a personalfiling system—for work and home. Get a good list-management organizer that you are inspired to play with. I alsosuggest that you give yourself permission to make any changesthat you have been contemplating for enhancing your workenvironments. Hang pictures, buy pens, toss stuff, rearrangeyour work space. Support your fresh start.• Set aside some time when you can tackle one whole area ofyour office, and then each part of your house. Gathereverything into your system, and work through the GettingThings Done process.• Share anything of value you've gleaned from this with someoneelse. (It's the fastest way to learn.)• Review Getting Things Done again in three to six months.You'll notice things you might have missed the first timethrough, and I guarantee it will seem like a whole new book.• Stay in touch with people who are broadcasting and reflectingthese behaviors and standards. (We're available. Visithttp://www.davidco.com anytime for tons of free supportmaterial, conversations about these best practices, currentCONCLUSIONinformation about supportive products and services, and accessto our global network of people sharing the best practices inproductivity. For anything, contact us at The David AllenCompany at info@davidco.com or 805-646-8432.)Have a great rest of your life!
259Index
accountability, 245-46Acheson, Dean, 237action reminders, 142-55on calendars, 142-43dispersal of, 154-55most common categories of, 144-49organizing as-soon-as-possible actionsby context, 143-49original items as, 150-55actions, 14current, 51four-criteria model for choosing, 49,191,192-95see also managing action; next actionsad hoc project thinking, 160-62agendas, 46,144,147-48applied outcome thinking, 250-52archives, 166-67areas of focus lists, 165,205-6Aristotle, 169attached notes, 161,221back-of-the-envelope planning, 54-56Bayne, Stephen, 125beginning, see getting startedBergson, Henry, 14bigger picture reviews, 189—90Boulanger, Nadia, 10brain, reticular activating system of, 68brainstorming, 56,57, 70-74,79,213-14distributed cognition and, 72—73keys to, 73-74mindmapping technique of, 70-72,220-21software applications for, 220-21Brilliant, Ashley, 5broken agreements with yourself,prevention of, 227—31Buddha, 201Buzan, Tony, 71,221cabinets, 112calendars, 94,140future options and, 171-73review of, 45,46,183,186things to list on, 39-40,142-43Cantor, Rosabeth Moss, 212Chattier, Emile, 72checklists, 176-80,186at all levels, 179blueprinting key areas of work andresponsibility, 177-78clarifying inherent projects andactions, 176for new situations, 178Chisolm, Brock, 243Churchill, Winston, 222clarity, 78-79,244-45cognition, distributive, 72-73Cohen, Daniel, 194collecting, 24,25-31gathering "incompletes" in,26-27success factors in, 29-31tools for, 27-29261INDEXcollecting your "stuff," 104-18in-basket inventory for, 117-18mind-sweep and, 113-17preparations for, 105-6problems in, 108-10things to leave where they are, 106-7time required for, 104from various locations, 110—13collection habit, 225-35amount of collecting required for,232-33negative feelings and, 226-27personal benefits of, 226—33and preventing broken agreementswith yourself, 227-31relationships and organizations and,233-35traditional time management vs.,231-32commitments, see internal commitments,dealing effectively withcomputers, 218next action list for, 144,145computer software, 219-21contact managers, 165—66context, 49,192-95Cooper, Ann McGee, 64Cooper, James Fenimore, 47countertops, 111Covey, Stephen, 19?critical thinking', 73-74"daily to-do" lists, 7-8,40-41daily work, threefold model for evalua-tion of, 50-51databases, 161-62day-specific actions, 39-40day-specific information, 40Day-Timers, 7decision catalysts, 172—73decision-making criteria, creation of, 63,64decorations, 106,107deferring, 131,135-36defining your work, 50-51delegating, 131,133-35,156-57systematic format for, 133-34tracking handoff in, 135desk drawers, 111desktop, clearing of, 110—11distributed cognition, 72--73doing, 25,48-53,191-210creating the option of, 237-40and four-criteria model for choosingactions, 49,191,192-95in processing "in," 131-33questions to ask yourself in, 209and six-level model for reviewing yourown work, 51-53,191,200-210and threefold model for evaluatingdaily work, 50-51,191,196-200Drucker,Peter F.,5,15,184dumbing down, 242-43Dumpsters, 94,102efficiency, xiEinstein, Albert, 41,67electronic note-taking, 28e-mail, 6databases and, 161-62in delegating, 134general-reference filing and, 164-65in-basket for, 31storage of, 28workflow from, 152-54emergency scanning, 122Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 15empowerment, 247-48energy availability, 49,192,194-95equipment, office, 106,107,112errands, 144,145-46events, upcoming, 172executive operational reviews, 189fast track, 249-50file folders, 93, 99,141,150nfiles:reference, 38-39,44-45tickler, 42,43-44,173-75filing systems, 96-101,218-19general-reference, 164-65,218-19hanging files in, 100-101labeling of, 100large category, 165262INDEXone alpha system for, 98-99purging and, 102success factors for, 97-101focus, 63,65,67-68vertical vs. horizontal, 20-21,54-56see also outcome focusingForster,E.M.,217four-criteria model for choosing actionsin the moment, 49,191,192-95GANTT charts, 211general-reference filing, 164-65,218—19getting started, 85-103implementation tricks for, 85-87one-final-thing syndrome and, 102-3setting aside time for, 87-89setting up space for, 89-91work tools and, 91-102Gibbon, Edward, 7Gleeson, Kerry, 16goals, one- to two-year, 52Grandview, 219hanging files, 100-101Harris, SidneyJ., 253HatfieldJ.A.,xiHavel, Vaclav, 20head, emptying of, 186high-tech collection tools, 28Hock, Dee, 66Hoffer, Eric, 6"hold and review" files and piles, 170Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 141home actions lists, 144,146-47Horace, 17horizontal control or focus, 20-21,24,54hoteling, 91Hubbard, Elbert, 34implementation tricks, 85-87see also getting started"in," see processing "in"in-baskets, 27, 30-31,108,117-18,176and last-in vs. first-in processing, 123incompletes (open loops), 12-13,26-27,45,46incompletion triggers lists, 114-17personal, 116-17professional, 114-15incubation, 41,42-44,125,126-27someday/maybe lists for, 42-43tickler files for, 42,43-44tools for, 35information gathering, 214—15inputs, 3—4Inspiration program, 220-21intelligent dumbing down, 242-43internal commitments, dealing effectivelywith, 12-18basic requirements for, 13and controlling your mind, 15-17exercise for, 13-14knowledge work and, 15transformation of "stuff" and, 17-18jobs, shifting definitions of, 6Johnson, Samuel, 252Kekich, David, 3,189Kempton, Sally, 23Kennedy, John F., 246knowledge work, 5,15labelers, 93,100La Bruysre, Jean de, 149Lambert, Craig, 10large-category filing, 165Leonardo da Vinci, 30libraries, 166-67life:big-picture view of, 53two-problem theory of, 251lists, 35-37,140-41areas of focus, 165,205-6next-action, 41,45,140,143-49,186projects, 34,37-38,45,137,140,155-58,205reviewing of, 183-84,186someday/maybe, 42-43,46,140,168-69,186three forms of, 141to-do, 7-8,17, 37,40-41.trigger, 114-17,206263INDEXlists {cont.)updating of, 47waiting-for, 35,46,140,149-50,186Lotus Notes, 162nMcGriffy, Michael, 40Maltz, Maxwell, 68managing action, 18—23bottom-up approach to, 19-20horizontal and vertical ways of, 20-21in one's mind vs. using objective tools,21-23as prime challenge, 18-19martial arts, ready state and, 9-12meetings, setting up, 214memory, short-term, 22-23memos to self, 176Microsoft Outlook, 7,141,153nMicrosoft Word, 219"mind like water" simile, 10-11,104,257mindmapping, 70-72,220-21Mind Over Water (Lambert), 10mind-sweep, 113-17,237moment-to-moment balancing act,199-200motivation, 63, 65moving forward, final tips on, 258Mowrer, O. H., 85multilevel outcome management, 253multitasking, 124mundane, mastering the, 252Myer, Rochelle, 62natural planning, 56—59amount of planning needed in, 77-80brainstorming and, 56,57,70-74, 79example of, 56—58five steps in, 56,62-81focus and, 63, 65,67-68next actions and, 56,58,75-77organizing and, 74-75outcome clarification and, 68-70,79power of, 253-54principles and, 56-57,66purpose and, 56-57,62-66, 79step-by-step questions for, 58-59vision and, 67next-action decisions, 236-48creating option of doing by, 237-40procrastination and, 240-44source of technique of, 237 .value of, 244-48next actions, 4,34-35,45,46,54calendars for, 39-40lists for, 41,140,143-49,186in planning, 56,58, 75—77in processing "in," 124-36nonactionable items, 33-34,41-45,125-28. incubation, 41,42-44,125,126-27organization of, 163—75in planning projects, 213-15reference, 41,44-45,125,127-28of someone else, 77trash, 41,42,125-26Nordenholt, George F., 242notebooks, 162-63notes, processing of, 185—86note-taking, electronic, 28objectives, two key, 3-4office actions lists, 144,146office equipment, 106,107,112office space, setting up, 89-91office supplies, see work toolsone-final-thing syndrome, 102-3one item at a time, processing of, 123-24open loops (incompletes), 12-13,26—27,45,46options, expansion of, 63,65organization, in managing workflow, 24,35-45basics of, 75next-action categories, 39-41nonactionable items, 41-45planning in, 56,57-58, 74-75,78of projects, 37-39workflow diagram for, 36organizers, 95-96organizing, 138-80,214of action reminders, 142—55of checklists, 176-80of nonactionable data, 163-75of project reminders, 155-63264INDEXseven basic categories in, 140—42workflow diagram for, 139organizing tools, 7-8outcome focusing, 249-56applied outcome thinking and, 250-52fast track and, 249-50and mastering the mundane, 252multilevel outcome management and,253natural planning and, 253-54positive organizational culture and,255-56outcomes, classification of, 68-70, 79outlines, planning and, 60-61Ovid, 216pagers, 28paper and pads, 27, 92,217paper-based files, 162paper-based workflow, management of,150-52paper-holding trays, 92papers, loose, 185"parking lot" for projects, 42-43Pauling, Linus, 70pending items, 136,142,187personal digital assistants (PDAs), 7,37,95-96,118,141,150n, 166,216personal incompletion triggers lists,116-17personal notebook planners, 7personal projects, 156phone calls, 144-45,149planning, 211-22choosing projects in, 212—15informal, 211-12real-world application of, 222support structures for, 218-21tools for, 215-21typical steps in, 213-15see also natural planning; projectplanningpositive organizational culture, 255-56Post-its, 93predefined work, 50,196principles, in planning, 56-57,66priorities, 49,53,192,195,210ABC codes for, 7-8process, 24,31-35actionable, 34do, delegate, or defer, 35next action, 34-35no action required, 33-34"Projects" lists, 34workflow diagram for, 32processing "in," 119-37description of, 119-21    .guidelines for, 121—24identifying projects and, 136-37next action and, 124-36no action required, 125-28as one-directional, 124workflow diagram for, 120procrastinating, 240-44productive state, getting into, 11-12productivity, 246-47professional incompletion triggers lists,114-15professional projects, 156project planning, 54-81key ingredients of relaxed control in,54natural model, 56-59,62-81reactive model, 61-62unnatural model, 59-61vertical focus and, 54-56projects, 37-39,46,211-22choice of, 212-15current, 51-52definition of, 37,136identification of, 136—37informal planning and, 211-12lists for, 34,37-38,137,140,155-58,205subsorting of, 156-57support material for, 38-39,140,159-63triggers for actuation of, see triggerspurpose, in planning, 56-57, 62-66, 79random project thinking, 215reactive planning, 61-62read/review lists, 144,148-49,150ready state, of martial artists, 9-12265INDEXreference material, 106,107,125,127-28,140organization of, 163-67variety of reference systems for, 164-67reference storage, 35,44reference systems, two types of, 44-45resources, alignment of, 63, 64responsibility, areas of, 52reticular activating system, 68reviewing, 24,45-47, 54,181-90,258of bigger picture, 189-90importance of, 45lists for, 144,148-49,150right time and place for, 187-88six-level model for, 51-53,191,200-210two major issues in, 181updating your system of, 184-89weekly, 46-47,159,184-86what and when, 45-46,181,182-84Rogers,Will,61,79Rolodexes, 165-66ruthless execution, xii-xiiiSaffo, Paul, 187Santayana, George, 63scanning, emergency, 122Schwab, Charles, 202Scientific American, 68setting up, see getting startedsharing, 258Shaw, George Bernard, 248short-term memory, 22-23Snyder, Steven, 251software, 219-21someday/maybe items, 167-73lists for, 42-43,46,140,168-69,186special categories of, 169-70staplers, 93starting, see getting startedstress, 23"stuff":.corralling of, 104-18definition of, 17key to management of, 18transformation of, 17-18subprojects, 157-58success, 63, 64Suzuki, Shunryu, 11Symantec, 219telephone calls, 144-45,149telephones, 28threefold model for evaluating dailywork, 50-51,191,196-200tickler files, 42,43-44,173-75tickling, 35time, 258available, 49,192,193-94departing from traditional manage-ment of, 231-32setting aside, 87-89as work factor, 7time-specific actions, 39to-do lists, 7-8,17, 37unworkable, 40-41Toffler,Alvin,54Tomlin, Lily, 69top item first, processing of, 122-23trash, 35,41,42guidelines for, 125-26tricks of implementation, 85-87triggers, 171lists of, 114-17,206Twain, Mark, 239,241two-minute rule, 131-33unnatural planning, 59-61values thinking, 8-9Van Doren, Mark, 11vertical control or focus, 20-21,54-56vision:planning and, 67three- to five-year, 52-53waiting-for lists, 35,46,140,149-50,186wastebasket/recycling bins, 94weekly review, 46-47,159,184-86why, value of thinking about, 63-66Wilson, Desmond, 230Woodruff, Julia Louis, 229266INDEXwork:ambiguous boundaries of, 5—6definition of, Anknowledge, 5,15shifting job definitions and, 6six-level model for review of, 51-53threefold model for evaluation of,50-51,191,196-200workflow, five stages of mastering,24-53collect, 24,25-31do, 25, 48-53organize, 24,35-45process, 24,31-35review, 24,45-47work space, setting up, 89-91,258work tools, 91-102,106,258basic list of, 92writing instruments, 216writing paper and pads, 27,217Yutang, Lin, 72"zone," 10
267Coming to Viking in Fall 2003Learn how to make things happen with less effort andstress and more energy and creativity in David Allen'snewest guide to a more productive life:Ready for Anything52 Productivity Principles for Work ad LifeIn Getting Things Done, David Allen offered a break-through system to enhance productivity—at work and indaily life. Now "the guru of personal productivity" {FastCompany) asks readers what is holding them back andshows how they can be ready for anything—with a clearmind, a clear deck, and clear intentions. Offering fifty-twoprinciples to clear your head, focus productivity, createstructures that work, and get in motion, Ready for Anythingshows readers how to make things happen with less effortand stress and a lot more energy, creativity, and clarity.ISBN 0-670-03250-6In every corner of the world, on every subject under the sun, Penguin representsquality and variety—the very best in publishing today.For complete information about books available from P e n g u i n — i n c l u d i n gPenguin Classics, Penguin Compass, and Puffins—and how to order them, writeto us at the appropriate address below. Please note that for copyright reasons theselection of books varies from country to country.In the United States: Please write to Penguin Group (USA), P.O. Box 12289Dept. B, Newark, New Jersey 07101-5289 or call 1-800-788-6262.In the United Kingdom: Please write to Dept. EP, Penguin Books Ltd, BathRoad, Harmondsworth, West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 0DA.In Canada: Please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue,Suite300, Toronto, Ontario M4V 3B2.In Australia: Please write to Penguin Books Australia Ltd, P.O. Box 251,Ringwood, Victoria 3134.In New Zealand: Please write to Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Private Bag 102902,North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10.In India: Please write to Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Panchsheel ShoppingCentre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017.In the Netherlands: Please write to Penguin Books Netherlands bv, Postbus 3507,NL-1001 AH Amsterdam.In Germany:' Please write to Penguin Books Deutschland GmbH, Metzlerstrasse26, 60594 Frankfurt am Main.In Spain: Please write to Penguin Books S.A., Bravo Murillo 19, 1° B, 28015Madrid.In Italy: Please write to Penguin Italia s.r.l, Via Benedetto Croce 2, 20094 Corsico,Milano.In France: Please write to Penguin France, Le Carre Wilson, 62 rue BenjaminBaillaud, 31500 Toulouse.In Japan: Please write to Penguin Books Japan Ltd, Kaneko Building, 2-3-25Koraku, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 112.In South Africa: Please write to Penguin Books South Africa (Pty) Ltd, Private BagX14, Parkview, 2122 Johannesburg.