C OP YRIGHT  © 2018 G OGGINS  B UIL T  N OT  B ORN , LLC
All rights  reserved.
ISBN:  978-1-5445-1226-6T o the unrelenting voice in my head that will never allow me to  stop.CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
1. I SHOULD HA VE BEEN A ST A TISTIC
2. TRUTH HUR TS
3. THE IMPOSSIBLE T ASK
4. T AKING SOULS
5. ARMORED MIND
6. IT’S NOT AB OUT A TROPHY
7. THE MOST POWERFUL WEAPON
8. T ALENT NOT REQUIRED
9. UNCOMMON AMONGST UNCOMMON
10. THE EMPOWERMENT OF F AIL URE
11. WHA T IF?
A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
AB OUT THE AUTHORW ARNING ORDER
TIME ZONE: 24/7
T ASK ORGANIZA TION: SOL O MIS SION
1 . SITU A TION:  Y ou ar e in danger of living a life so
comfortable and sof t that you will die without ever
r ealizing your true potential.
2 . MIS SION:  T o unshackle your mind. Ditch the victim’s
mentality for ever . Own all aspects of your life
completely . Build an unbr eak able foundation.
3 . EXECUTION:
A . R ead this cover to cover . Study the techniques
within, accept all ten challenges. R epeat.
R epetition will callous your mind.
B . If you do your job to the best of your ability, this
will hurt. This mission is not about making yourself
feel better . This mission is about being better and
having a gr eater impact on the world.
C . Don’t stop when you ar e tir ed. Stop when you ar e
done.
4 . CLAS SIFIED:  This is the origin story of a her o . The her o
is you.
B Y COMMAND OF : DA VID GOGGINS
SIGNED:
RANK AND SERVICE: CHIEF , U.S. NA VY SEALS,
RETIREDINTRODUCTION
D O  Y OU  KNOW  WHO  Y OU  REALL Y  ARE  AND  WHA T  Y OU ’ RE  CAP ABLE  OF ?
I’m sur e you think so, but just because you believe
something doesn’t mak e it true. Denial is the ultimate
comfort  zone.
Don’t wor ry, you ar en’t alone. In every town, in every
country, all over the world, millions r oam the str eets, dead -
eyed  as zombies, addicted to comfort, embracing a victim’s
mentality and unawar e of their true potential. I know this
because I meet and hear fr om them all the time, and
because just lik e you, I used to be one of  them.
I had a damn good e x cuse  too .
Life dealt me a bad hand. I was bor n br ok en, gr ew up with
beat downs, was tor mented in school, and called nigger
mor e times than I could  count.
W e wer e once poor, surviving on welfar e, living in
gover nment - subsidized  h ousi ng, and my depr ession was
smothering. I lived life at the bottom of the bar r el, and my
futur e for ecast was bleak as  fuck.
V ery few people know how the bottom feels, but I do . It’s
lik e quicksand. It grabs you, sucks you under, and won’t let
go . Wh en life  is lik e that  it’s easy to drif t and continue to
mak e the same comfortable choices that ar e killing you,
over and over  again.
But the truth is we all mak e habitual, self - limiting  choices.
It’s as natural as a sunset and as fundamental as gravity . It’s
how our brains ar e wir ed, which is why motivation is  crap.Even the best pep talk or self - help  ha ck is not hing but a
temporary ﬁx. It won’t r ewir e your brain. It won’t amplif y
your voice or uplif t your life. Motivation changes e xactly
nobody . The bad hand tha t was my life was mine, and mine
alone to  ﬁx.
So I sought out pain, fell in love with suﬀering, and
eventually transfor med myself fr om the weak est  piece of
shit on the pl anet into the har dest man God ever cr eated, or
so I tell  myself .
Odds a r e you  have had a  much better childhood than I did,
and ev en now  might have a damn decent life, but no matter
who you ar e, who your par ents ar e or wer e, wher e  you live,
what y ou do for a living , or how much money you have,
you’r e pr obably living at about 40 per cent of your true
capability .
Damn  shame.
W e all have the potential to be so much  mor e.
Y ears ago, I was invited to be on a panel at the
Massachusetts Institute of T echnology . I’d never se t foot in a
university lectur e hall as a student. I’d bar ely graduated
high school,  yet I was at one of the most pr estigious
institutions in the country to discuss mental toughness with
a hand ful of others. A t some point in the discussion an
esteemed MIT pr ofessor said that we each have genetic
limitations. Har d ceilings. That ther e ar e some things we just
can’t do no matter how m entally tough we ar e. When we hit
our genetic ceiling, he said, mental toughness doesn’t enter
into the  equation.
Everyone in that r oom seemed to accept his v ersion of
r eality because this senior, tenur ed pr ofessor was known for
r esear ching mental toughness. It was his life’s wo rk. It wasalso a bunch of bullshit, and to me he was using science to
let us all oﬀ the  hook.
I’d been quiet until then because I was sur r ounded by all
these smart people, feeling stupid, but someone in the
audience noticed the look on my face and ask ed if  I agr eed.
And if you ask me a dir ect question, I won’t be  shy .
“Ther e’s something to be said for living it instead of
studying it,” I said, then tur ned towar d the pr ofessor . “What
you sa id is true for most people, but not 100 per cent. Ther e
will alw ays be the 1 per c ent of us who ar e willing  to put in
the work to def y the  odds.”
I went  on to e xplain wh at I knew fr om e xperience. That
anybody can become a totally diﬀer ent person and achieve
what so - called  e xperts lik e him claim is impossible, but it
tak es a lot of heart, will, and an ar mor ed  mind.
Heraclitus, a philosopher bor n in the P ersian Empir e back in
the ﬁf th century B C, had it right when he wr ote about men
on the battleﬁeld. “ Out of every one hundr ed men,” he
wr ote, “ten shouldn’t eve n be ther e, eighty ar e just tar gets,
nine a r e the r eal ﬁghters, and we ar e luck y to have them,
for they mak e the battle. Ah, but the one, one is a  war rior…”
F r om the time you tak e your ﬁrst br eath, you become
eligible to die. Y ou also become eligible to ﬁnd your
gr eatness an d become the One W ar rior . But it is up to you to
equip yourself for the battle ahead. Only you can master
your m ind, w hich is what it tak es to live a bold life ﬁlled with
accomplishments most people consider beyo nd their
capability .
I am not a ge nius lik e those pr ofessors at MIT, but I am that
One W ar rior . And the story you ar e about to r ead, the story
of my fuck ed - up  life, will illuminate a pr oven path to self -mastery  and empower you to face r eality, hold yourself
accountable, push past pain, lear n to love what you fear,
r elish failur e,  live to your fullest potential, and ﬁnd out who
you r eally  ar e.
Human beings change t hr ough study, habit, and  stories.
Thr ough my story you will  lear n what the body and  mind ar e
capable of when they’r e driven to maximum capacity, and
how to get ther e. Because when you’r e driven, whatever is
in f r ont of you, whether it ’s racism, se xism, injuries, divor ce,
depr ession, obesity, tragedy, or poverty, become s fuel for
your  metamorphosis.
The steps laid out her e amount to the evolutionary
algorithm, on e that obliterates bar riers, glimmers with glory,
and delivers lasting  peace.
I hope you’r e r eady . It’s time to go to war with  yourself .C H A P T E R  O N E
1 .  I SHOULD HA VE BEEN A
ST A TISTIC
W E  FOUND  HELL  IN  A  BEAUTIFUL  NEIGHB ORHOOD . I N  1981, W ILLIAMSVILLE
oﬀer ed the tastiest r eal estate in Buﬀalo, New Y o rk. L eaf y
and fri endly, its safe str eets wer e dotted with dainty homes
ﬁlled with model citizen s. Doctors, attor neys, st eel plant
e x ecutives, d entists, and pr ofessional football players lived
ther e with their adoring w ives and their 2.2 kids. C ars wer e
new, r oads swept, possibilities endless. W e’r e talking about
a liv ing, br eathing Americ an Dr eam. Hell was a cor ner lot on
P aradise  R oad.
That’s wher e  we lived in  a two - story , four - bedr oom , white
wooden home with four squar e pillars framing a fr ont por ch
that led to t he widest, gr eenest lawn in W illiamsville. W e
had a vegetable gar den out back and a two - car  garage
stock ed with a 1962 R olls R oyce Silver Cloud,  a 1980
Mer cedes 450 SLC, and, in the driveway, a sparkling new
1981 black Corvette. Everyone on P aradise R oad lived near
the top of th e food chain, and based on appearances, most
of our neighbors thought that we, the so - called  happy, well -
adjusted  Goggins family, wer e the tip of that spear . But
glossy surfaces r eﬂect much mor e than they  r eveal.
They’d see us most weekday mor nings, gather ed in the
driveway at 7 a.m. My dad, T runnis Goggins, wasn’t tall buthe was  handsome and built lik e a bo x er . He wor e tailor ed
suits, his smile war m and open. He look ed every bit the
successful businessman on his way to work. My mother,
Jackie, was seventeen yea rs younger, slender and beautiful,
and my br other and I we r e clean cut, well dr essed in jeans
and pa stel Iz od shirts, and strapped with backpack s just lik e
the other kids. The whit e kids. In our version o f aﬄuent
America, eac h driveway was a staging gr ound for nods and
waves befor e par ents and childr en r ode oﬀ to work and
school. Neigh bors saw what they wanted. Nobod y pr obed
too  deep.
Good thing. The truth w as, the Goggins family had just
r etur ned home fr om another all - nighter  in the hood , and if
P aradise R oad was Hell, that meant I lived with the Devil
himself . As soon as our n eighbors shut the door or tur ned
the cor ner, my father’s smile morphed into a scowl. He
bark ed or ders and went inside to sleep another one oﬀ, but
our work wasn’t done. M y br other, T runnis Jr ., and I had
somewher e t o be, and it was up to our sleepless mother to
get us  ther e.
I wa s in ﬁrst grade in 1981, and I was in a school  daze, for
r eal. N ot bec ause the academics wer e har d—at lea st not yet
—but because I couldn’t stay awak e. The teacher’s sing -
song  voi ce was my lullaby, my  cr ossed ar ms on my de sk, a
comf y pillow, and her sharp wor ds—once she caught me
dr eaming—an unwelcome  alar m clock that wouldn’t stop
blaring. Childr en that young ar e inﬁnite sponges. They soak
up language  and ideas at warp speed to establish a
fundamental foundation upon which most people build life -
long  skills lik e r eading and spelling and basic math, but
because I work ed nights, I couldn’t concentrate on anything
most mor nings, e x cept trying to stay  awak e.R ecess and PE wer e a wh ole diﬀer ent mineﬁeld. O ut on the
playgr ound s taying lucid was the easy part. The har d part
was th e hiding. Couldn’t let my shirt slip. Couldn’t wear
shorts. Bruises wer e r ed ﬂags I couldn’t show because if I
did, I knew I ’d catch even mor e. Still, on that pl aygr ound
and in the cl assr oom I knew I was safe, for a little while at
least. I t was the one place he couldn’t r each me, at least not
physically . My br other we nt thr ough a similar dance in sixth
grade, his ﬁrst year in middle school. He had his own
wounds to hide and sleep to harvest, because once that bell
rang, r eal life  began.
The ride fr om W illiamsvi lle to the Masten District in East
Buﬀalo took about a half an hour, but it may as well have
been a world away . Lik e much of East Buﬀalo, Mast en was a
mostly black working - class  ne ighbor hoo d in the inner city
that was r ough ar ound the edges; though, in the early
1980s, it was not yet completely ghetto as fuck. Back then
the Bethlehem Steel plant was still humming and Buﬀalo
was th e last gr eat American steel town. Most men in the
city, black and white, wor k ed solid union jobs and ear ned a
living w age, which meant  business in Masten was good. F or
my dad, it always had  been.
By the time h e was twenty years old he owned a Coca - Cola
distribution concession and four delivery r oute s in the
Buﬀalo ar ea. That’s good money for a kid, but he h ad bigger
dr eams and an eye on the futur e. His futur e had four wheels
and a disco funk sound track. When a local bak ery shut
down, he leased the building and built one of Buﬀalo’s ﬁrst
r oller sk ating  rinks.
F ast - forwar d  ten years and Sk ateland had been r elocated to
a build ing on F er ry Str eet that str etched nearly a full block
in t he heart of the Maste n District. He opened a bar above
the rin k, which he named the V er million R oom. In the 1970s,that was the place to be in East Buﬀalo, and it’s wher e he
met m y mother when she was just nineteen and he was
thirty - six . It was  her ﬁrst time away fr om home. Jackie gr ew
up in the Catholic Chur ch . T runnis was the son of a minister,
and knew her language well enough to masquerade as a
believer, which appealed to her . But let’s k eep it r eal. She
was just as drunk on his  char m.
T runnis Jr . was bor n in 19 71. I was bor n in 1975, and by the
time I was s ix years old, the r oller disco craze was at its
absolute pea k. Sk ateland  r ock ed every night. W e’d usually
get ther e ar ound 5 p.m., and while my br other work ed the
concession s tand—popping cor n, grilling hot dogs , loading
the cooler, and making pizzas—I or ganized the sk ates by
size an d style. Each af ter noon, I stood on a step stool to
spray my stock with aer osol deodorizer and r eplace the
rubber stoppers. That aer osol stink would cloud all ar ound
my head and live in my nostrils. My eye s look ed
per manently bloodshot. It was the only thing I could smell
for hou rs. Bu t those wer e the distractions I had to ignor e to
stay or ganized and on hustle. Because my dad, who work ed
the DJ  booth, was always watching, and if any of those
sk ates went missing, it meant my ass. Befor e the doors
opened I’d polish the sk ate rink ﬂoor with a dust mop that
was twice my  size.Sk ateland, age six
A t ar ound 6 p.m., my mother called us to dinner in the back
oﬃce. That woman lived in a per manent state of denial, but
her ma ter nal instinct wa s r eal, and it made a big fucking
show of itself, grasping for any shr ed of nor mal cy . Every
night in that oﬃce, she’d set out two electric bur ne rs on the
ﬂoor, sit with her legs curled behind her, and pr ep ar e a fulldinner—r oast meat, potatoes, gr een beans, and din ner r olls,
while my dad did the books and made  calls.
The fo od wa s good, but even at six and seven years old I
knew our “ family dinner ” was a bullshit facsimile compar ed
to wha t most families had. Plus, we ate fast. Ther e was no
time to  enjoy  it because a t 7 p.m. when the doors opened, it
was show time, and we a ll had to be in our places with our
stations pr ep ped. My dad was the sheriﬀ, and once he
stepped into the DJ booth he had us triangulated. He
scanned that r oom lik e an all - seeing  e ye, and if y ou fuck ed
up you’d hear about it. Unless you felt it  ﬁrst.
The r o om didn’t look lik e much under the harsh, over head
house lights, but once he dimmed them, the show lights
bathed the rink in r ed an d glanced oﬀ the spinning mir r or
ball, conjuring a sk ate disco fantasy . W eek end or weeknight,
hundr eds of sk aters pile d thr ough that door . Most of the
time they came in as a fa mily, paying their $3 entrance fee
and half - dollar  sk ate fee befor e hitting the  ﬂoor .
I r e nted out the sk ates a nd managed that entir e station by
myself . I car ried that step stool ar ound lik e a crutch. W ithout
it, the customers couldn’t even see me. The bigger - sized
sk ates wer e down below the counter, but the sma ller sizes
wer e stor ed so high I’d have to scale the shelves, which
always made the custom ers laugh. Mom was the one and
only cashier . She collected everyone’s cover char ge, and to
T runnis, money was everything. He counted the people as
they came in, calculating his tak e in r eal time so he had a
r ough idea of what to e xpect when he counted  out the
r egister af ter we closed up. And it had better all be  ther e.
All the  mone y was his. T he r est of us never ear ne d a cent
for our sweat. In fact, my mother was never given any
money of her own. She had no bank account or cr edit car dsin her name. He contr olled everything, and we all knew
what would happen if her cash drawer ever came up  short.
None of the customers who came thr ough our doors knew
any of this, of course. T o them, Sk ateland was a family -
owned - and - operated  dr eam cloud. My dad spun the fading
vinyl echoes of disco and funk and the early rumb les of hip
hop. B ass bounced oﬀ the r ed walls, courtesy of Buﬀalo’s
favorite son Rick James, Geor ge Clinton’s F unk adelic, and
the ﬁrst tracks ever r ele ased by hip hop innovators R un
DMC. S ome o f the kids we r e speed sk ating. I lik ed to go fast
too, but we had our shar e of sk ate dancers, and that ﬂoor
got  funk y .
F or the  ﬁrst hour or two the par ents stayed downs tairs and
sk ated, or watched their kids spin the oval, but they would
eventually le ak upstairs to mak e their own scene, and when
enough of them made the ir move, T runnis slipped out of the
DJ b ooth so he could join  them. My dad was consi der ed the
unoﬃcial ma yor of Masten, and he was a phony po litician to
the cor e. His customers  wer e his marks, and what they
didn’t know was that no m atter how many drinks he pour ed
on the house and br o hugs he shar ed, he didn’t give a fuck
about any of them. They wer e all dollar signs to him. If he
pour ed you a drink for f r ee, it was because he knew you
would buy two or thr ee  mor e.
While w e had  our shar e o f all - night  s k ates  and twenty - four -
hour  sk ate marat hons, the Sk ateland doors typically cl osed
at 1 0 p.m. T hat’s when my mother, br other, and I went to
work, ﬁ shing bloody tamp ons out of shit - ﬁlled  toilets, airing
the lingering cannabis haze out of both bathr ooms, scraping
bacteria - loaded  gum oﬀ the rink ﬂoor, cleaning the
concession kitchen, and taking inventory . Just befor e
midnight, we’d slog into the oﬃce, half - dead . Our mother
would tuck my br other and me beneath a blank et on theoﬃce sofa, our heads opposite one another, as the ceiling
shook with the sound of bass - heavy  funk.
Mom was still on the  clock.
As soo n as she stepped inside the bar, T runnis had her
working the door or hustling downstairs lik e a booze mule to
fetch c ases of liquor fr om the basement. Ther e was always
some menial  task to perfor m and she didn’t stop moving,
while my father k ept watch fr om his cor ner of the bar wher e
he c ould tak e in the whole  scene. In those days, Ri ck James,
a B uﬀalo native and on e of my father’s closest friends,
stopped by whenever he was in town, parking his Ex calibur
on the sidewalk out fr ont. His car was a billboar d that let the
hood know a Superfr eak was in the house. He wasn’t the
only celebrity  that came thr ough. OJ Simpson was one of the
NFL’s b iggest stars, and he and his Buﬀalo Bills te ammates
wer e r egulars, as was T eddy P ender grass and Sister Sledge.
If you don’t know the names, look them  up.
Maybe if I had been older, or my father had been a good
man, I might  have had so me pride in being part of a cultural
moment lik e that, but yo ung kids ar en’t about that life. It’s
almost lik e, no matter wh o our par ents ar e and w hat they
do, we’r e all bor n with a moral compass that’s  pr operly
tuned. When you’r e six, seven, or eight years old, you know
what f eels right and what feels way the fuck oﬀ. And when
you ar e bor n  into a cyclo ne of ter r or and pain, yo u know it
doesn’t have  to be that way, and that truth nags at you lik e
a splin ter in your jack ed up mind. Y ou can choose to ignor e
it, but the d ull thr obbing is always ther e as the days and
nights bleed together into one blur r ed  memory .
Some m oments do stick out though, and one I’m thinking of
right now still haunts m e. That was the night my mom
stepped into the bar befo r e she was e xpected and found mydad sw eet talking a woman about ten years her junior .
T runnis saw her watching and shrugged while my mother
eyeballed him  and slugged two shots of Johnnie W alk er R ed
to c alm her nerves. He no ticed her r eaction and didn’t lik e it
one damn  bit.
She knew how things wer e. That T runnis ran pr ostitutes
acr oss the bor der to F ort Erie in Canada. A summer cottage
belonging to the pr esident of one of Buﬀalo’s biggest banks
doubled as his pop - up  br othel. He intr oduced Buﬀalo
bank ers to his girls when ever he needed a longer line of
cr edit, and those loans always came thr ough. My mom knew
the yo ung wo man she was watching was one of the girls in
his stable. She’d seen he r befor e. Once, she walk ed in on
them f ucking on the Sk ateland oﬃce sofa, wher e she tuck ed
her childr en in damn near every night. When she found
them together, the woman smiled at her . T runnis shrugged.
No, my mom wasn’t clu eless, but seeing it with her own
eyes always  bur ned.
Ar ound midnight, my mot her dr ove with one of our security
guar ds to mak e a bank deposit. He begged her to leave my
father . He told her to leave that very night. Maybe he knew
what was coming. She did  too, but she couldn’t run  because
she had no independent means whatsoever, and she wasn’t
going to leave us in his hands. Plus, she had no rights to
community pr operty because T runnis had always r efused to
mar ry her, which was a riddle she was only then starting to
solve. My mother came fr om a solid, middle class family,
and had always been the virtuous type. He r esented that,
tr eated his hook ers bette r than the mother of his sons, and
as a r esult he had her trapped. She was 100 per cent
dependent, and if she wanted to leave, she’d have to walk
with nothing at  all.My br other and I never s lept well at Sk ateland. The ceiling
shook too much because  the oﬃce was dir ectly below the
dance ﬂoor . When my m other walk ed in that night I was
alr eady awak e. She smile d, but I noticed the tears in her
eyes and r emember smel ling the scotch on her br eath when
she scooped me up in her ar ms as tenderly as she could. My
father trailed in af ter her, sloppy and annoyed. He pulled a
pistol fr om beneath the cu shion wher e I slept (yes, you r ead
that right, ther e was a l oaded gun under the cushion on
which I slept at six years old!), ﬂashed it at me, an d smiled
befor e concealing it benea th his pant leg in an ankle holster .
In his other h and wer e two br own paper shopping bags ﬁlled
with nearly $10,000 in cash. So far it was a typical  night.
My par ents didn’t speak  on the drive home, though the
tension between them simmer ed. My mom pulled into the
driveway on P aradise R oa d just befor e 6 a.m., a little early
by our standar ds. T runnis stumbled fr om the car, disabled
the ala r m, dr opped the cash on the kitchen table, and went
upstairs. W e followed him , and she tuck ed us both  into our
beds, kissed me on the for ehead, and tur ned out the light
befor e slipping into the master suite wher e she found him
waiting, str oking his leat her belt. T runnis didn’t appr eciate
being glar ed at by my mom, especially in  public.
“This b elt cam e all the wa y fr om T e xas just to whip  you,” he
said, calmly . Then he started swinging it, buckle ﬁrst.
Sometimes m y mother fought back, and she did th at night.
She thr ew a marble cand lestick at his head. He du ck ed and
it thud ded the wall. She ran into the bathr oom, lock ed the
door, and cower ed on th e toilet. He kick ed the d oor down
and backhanded her har d . Her head slammed into the wall.
She was bar ely conscious  when he grabbed a ﬁst ful of her
hair and dragged her down the  hall.By then my br other and I had hear d the violence , and we
watched him  drag her all the way down the stairs to the ﬁrst
ﬂoor, t hen cr ouch over her with the belt in his hand. She
was bl eeding fr om the temple and the lip, and the sight of
her blood lit a fuse in me. In that moment m y hatr ed
over came my  fear . I ran downstairs and jumped on his back,
slammed my tiny ﬁsts into his back, and scratched at his
eyes. I’d caught him oﬀ guar d and he fell to one knee. I
wailed on  him.
“ Don’t hit my mom!” I yelled. He tossed me to the gr ound,
stalk ed towa r d me, belt in hand, then tur ned to war d my
mother .
“Y ou’r e raising a gangster,” he said, half - smiling .
I curled into a  ball when he started swinging his be lt at me. I
could feel bruises rise o n my back as my mom  crawled
towar d the contr ol pad near the fr ont door . She pr essed the
panic button and the house e xploded in alar m. He fr oze,
look ed towar d the ceiling, mopped his br ow with his sleeve,
took a deep br eath, loope d and buckled his belt, and went
upstairs to wash oﬀ all t hat evil and hate. P olice wer e on
their way, and he knew  it.
My mother’s r elief was short - lived . When the cops ar rived,
T runnis met them at the door . They look ed over his shoulder
towar d my mom, who sto od several paces behind  him, her
face s wollen and cak ed with dried blood. But those wer e
diﬀer ent days. Ther e was  no #metoo back then. That shit
didn’t e xist, and they ign or ed her . T runnis told them it was
all a whole lot of nothin g. Just some necessary domestic
discipline.
“ L ook a t this house. Does  it look lik e I mistr eat my wife?” He
ask ed. “I give her mink c oats, diamond rings, I bust my assto g ive her e verything she wants, and she thr ows a marble
candlestick at my head. She’s  spoiled.”
The police chuckled along  with my father as he walk ed them
to their car . They lef t without interviewing her . He didn’t hit
her ag ain that mor ning. He didn’t have to . The psyc hological
damage was done. F r om t hat point on it was clear to us that
as far as T ru nnis and the law wer e concer ned it w as open
season, and we wer e the  hunted.
Over the ne xt year, our schedule didn’t change m uch and
the beatings continued, w hile my mother tried to paper over
the da rkness with swatch es of light. She knew I wanted to
be a Scout, so she signed me up for a local tr o op. I still
r emember pu tting on that navy blue Cub Scout but ton down
one Sa tur day . I felt pr oud wearing a unifor m and knowing at
least fo r a few hours I could pr etend that I was a nor mal kid.
My mo m smiled as we h eaded for the door . My pride, her
smile, wasn’t just because of the damn Cub Scouts. They
r ose up  fr om a deeper place. W e wer e taking actio n to ﬁnd
something positive for ou rselves in a bleak situation. It was
pr oof that we matter ed, and that we wer en’t completely
powerless.
That’s when my father came home fr om the V er million
R oom.
“Wher e you two going?” He glar ed at me. I star ed at the
ﬂoor . My mother clear ed her  thr oat.
“I’m ta king David to his ﬁ rst Cub Scout meeting,” she said,
sof tly .
“The hell you ar e!” I look ed up, and he laughed as my eyes
welled up with tears. “W e’r e going to the  track.”W ithin the hour we’d ar rived at Batavia Downs , an old -
school  har ne ss horse race track, the type wher e jock eys r ide
behind the horses in light weight buggies. My dad grabbed a
racing for m as soon we st epped thr ough the gate. F or hours,
the th r ee of us watched him place bet af ter bet, chain
smok e, drink  scotch, and raise holy hell as every pony he
bet on ﬁnished out of the money . W ith my dad raging at the
gambling gods and acting  a fool, I tried to mak e myself as
small as possible whenever people walk ed by, but I still
stuck o ut. I was the only k id in the stands dr essed lik e a Cub
Scout. I was pr obably the  only black Cub Scout th ey’d ever
seen, and my unifor m was a lie. I was a  pr etender .
T runnis lost thousands of  dollars that day, and he wouldn’t
shut up about it on the drive home, his raspy th r oat raw
fr om n icotine. My br othe r and I wer e in the cramped back
seat and whenever he spat out the window, his phlegm
boomeranged into my face. Each dr op of his nasty saliva on
my ski n bur ned lik e venom and intensiﬁed my hate. I’d long
since l ear ned that the best way to avoid a beat down was to
mak e myself  as invisible as possible, avert my eyes, ﬂoat
outside my body, and hope to go unnoticed. It was a
practice we’d all honed over the years, but I was done with
that shit. I would no longer hide fr om the Devil. That
af ter noon as he veer ed on to the highway and headed home,
he con tinued to rave on, and I mad - dogged  h im fr om the
back seat. Have you ev er hear d the phrase, “ F aith Over
F ear ”? F or me it was Hate Over  F ear .
He caught my eyes in the r earview  mir r or .
“Y ou got something to  say?!”
“W e shouldn’t have gone to the track anyway,” I  said.My br other tur ned and st ar ed at me lik e I’d lost my damn
mind. My mother squir med in her  seat.
“Say t hat one mor e time.” His wor ds came slow, dripping
with d r ead. I didn’t say a wor d, so he started r eaching
behind the seat trying to smack me. But I was so small, it
was ea sy to hide. The car veer ed lef t and right as he was
half - tur ned  in my dir ection, punching air . He’d bar ely
touched me, which only stok ed his ﬁr e. W e dr ove in silence
until he caught his br eath. “When we get home, you’r e
gonna tak e your clothes oﬀ,” he  said.
That’s what he’d say when he was r eady to bestow a serious
beat d own, a nd ther e was no avoiding it. I did what I was
told. I went into my be dr oom and took oﬀ my clothes,
walk ed down  the hall to his r oom, closed the doo r behind
me, tu r ned the lights oﬀ, then laid acr oss the cor n er of the
bed with my legs dangling, my torso str etched out in fr ont of
me, and my ass e xposed . That was the pr otocol, and he’d
designed it for maximum psychological and physical  pain.
The beatings  wer e of ten brutal, but the anticipation was the
worst part. I couldn’t see the door behind me, and he’d tak e
his time, letting my dr ead  build. When I hear d him open the
door, m y panic spik ed. Even then the r oom was so dark I
couldn’t see much with my peripheral vision, and couldn’t
pr epar e for the ﬁrst smack until his belt hit my skin. It was
never just two or thr ee lickings either . Ther e was no
particular count, so we never knew when or if he was gonna
stop.
This be ating lasted minutes upon minutes. He start ed on my
butt, b ut the sting was so bad I block ed it with my hands, so
he moved down and sta rted whipping my thighs . When I
dr opped my hands to my thighs he swung at my lo wer back.
He belted me dozens of times, and was br eathless,coughing and slick with sweat by the time it was over . I was
br eathing heavy too, but I wasn’t crying. His evil was too
r eal and my hate gave me courage. I r efused to give that
motherfuck er the satisfaction. I just stood up, look ed the
Devil in his e ye, limped to my r oom, and stood in fr ont of a
mir r or . I was cover ed in welts fr om my neck to the cr ease at
the knees. I didn’t go to school for several  days.
When you’r e getting beat consistently, hope evaporates.
Y ou stiﬂe your emotions , but your trauma oﬀ - gasses  in
unconscious ways. A f ter countless beatings she endur ed
and wi tnessed, this partic ular beat down lef t my mother in a
constant fog,  a shell of the woman I r emember ed fr om a few
years befor e . She was d istracted and vacant mo st of the
time, e x cept when he called her name. Then she’d hop - to
lik e she was his slave. I didn’t know until years later that she
was considering  suicide.
My br o ther a nd I took our pain out on each other . W e’d sit or
stand a cr oss fr om one another and he would thr ow punches
as har d  as he could at me. It usually started out as a game,
but he was four years older, much str onger, and he
connected w ith all his power . Whenever I’d fall, I’d get up
and he ’d hit me again, as har d as he could, yelling lik e a
martial arts war rior at the top of his lungs, his face twisted
with  rage.
“Y ou’r e not hurting me! Is that all you fucking have?” I’d
shout back. I wanted him to know that I could tak e mor e
pain th an he  could ever d eliver, but when it was ti me to fall
asleep and ther e wer e no  mor e battles to ﬁght, no  place to
hide, I wet the bed. Nearly every  night.
My mother’s every day was a lesson in survival. She was
told she was worthless s o of ten she started to b elieve it.
Everything she did was an eﬀort to appease him so hewouldn’t bea t her sons or whip her ass, but th er e wer e
invisible trip wir es in her world and sometimes she never
knew w hen or how she set them oﬀ until af ter he slapped
the shit out of her . Other times she knew she teed herself up
for a vicious beat  down.
One day I c ame home early fr om school with  a nasty
earache and laid down on  my mother’s side of their bed, my
lef t ear thr obbing in e x cruciating pain. W ith each thr ob my
hate s pik ed. I knew I w ouldn’t be going to the doctor
because my father didn’t appr ove of spending his money on
doctors or dentists. W e didn’t have health insurance, a
pediatrician, or a dentist. If we got injur ed or sick, we wer e
told to shak e it oﬀ bec ause he wasn’t down to pay for
anything that didn’t dir e ctly beneﬁt T runnis Gog gins. Our
health didn’t meet that standar d, and that pissed  me the
fuck  oﬀ.
A f ter about a half hour, m y mother came upstairs  to check
on me  and when I r olled onto my back she could see blood
dribbling down the side of my neck and smear ed all over the
pillow .
“That’s it,” she said, “come with  me.”
She go t me out of bed, d r essed me, and helped me to her
car, bu t befor e she could start the engine, my dad chased
us  down.
“Wher e you think you’r e  going?!”
“The e mer gency r oom,” she said as she tur ned the ignition.
He r ea ched for the handle but she peeled out ﬁrst, leaving
him in her dust. F urious, he stomped inside, slammed the
door, and called out to my  br other .“Son, get me a Johnnie W alk er!” T runnis Jr . br ought over a
bottle of R ed Label and a glass fr om the wet bar . He pour ed
and pour ed and watched my dad down shot af ter shot. Each
one fueled an infer no . “Y ou and David need to be str ong,”
he rav ed. “I’m not raising a bunch of faggots! And that’s
what you’ll be if you go t o the doctor every time y ou get a
little boo boo, understand?” My br other nodded, petriﬁed.
“Y our last name is Goggins, and we shak e it  oﬀ!”
A ccor ding to the doctor we saw that night, my mother got
me to the ER just in time.  My ear infection was so bad that if
we’d waited any longer, I would have lost my hearing in my
lef t ear  for life. She risk ed her ass to save mine and  we both
knew she’d pay for it. W e dr ove home in eerie  silence.
My dad  was still stewing at the kitchen table by the time we
tur ned onto P aradise R oad , and my br other was still pouring
him s hots. T runnis Jr . fear ed our father, but he also
worshipped t he man and was under his spell. As the ﬁrst
bor n s on he was tr eated better . T runnis would still lash out
at h im, but in his warped  mind, T runnis Jr . was h is prince.
“When you gr ow up I’m gonna want to see you be the man
of your  house,” T runnis told him. “ And you’r e gonna see me
be a man  tonight.”
Moments af ter we walk ed thr ough the fr ont door, T runnis
beat our mother senseless, but my br other couldn’t watch.
Whenever the beatings e xploded lik e a thunderstor m
over head, he ’d wait them out in his r oom. He ign or ed the
darkness because the tru th was way too heavy for him to
car ry . I always paid close fucking  attention.
During the summers, ther e was no midweek r espite fr om
T runnis, but my br other and I lear ned to hop on our bik es
and stay far away for as long as we could. One da y, I came
home for lunch and ente r ed the house thr ough the garagelik e nor mal. My father usually slept deep into the af ter noon,
so I  ﬁg ur ed t he coast was clear . I was wr ong. My fa ther was
paranoid. He did enough shady deals to attract some
enemies, and he’d set the alar m af ter we lef t the  house.
When I opened the door, sir ens scr eamed and my stomach
dr opped. I fr oze, back ed u p against the wall, and lis tened for
footsteps. I hear d the stairs cr eak and knew I was fuck ed.
He came downstairs in his br own ter rycloth r obe, pistol in
hand, and cr ossed fr om the dining r oom into the living
r oom, his gun out fr ont. I  could see the bar r el com e ar ound
the cor ner  slowly .
As soon as he clear ed the  cor ner he could see me  standing
just twenty feet away, but he didn’t dr op his weapon. He
aimed it right between my eyes. I star ed straight at him,
blank as possible, my feet anchor ed to the ﬂoor boar ds.
Ther e was no one else in the house, and pa rt of me
e xpected him to pull the t rigger, but by this time in my life I
no long er car ed if I lived or died. I was an e xhausted eight -
year - old  kid , plain ol d fucking tir ed of being ter riﬁed of m y
father, and I was sick of S k ateland too . A f ter a minute or two
he lower ed his weapon and went back  upstairs.
By now  it was becoming clear that someone was going to
die on P aradise R oad. My  mother knew wher e T runnis k ept
his .38. Some days she timed and followed him—envisioned
how it  would play out. They’d tak e separate  cars to
Sk ateland, sh e’d grab his gun fr om beneath the o ﬃce sofa
cushions befor e he could get ther e, bring us home early, put
us to bed, an d wait for him  by the fr ont door with his gun in
hand. When he pulled up , she’d step out the fr ont door and
mur der him in his driveway—leave his body for the milkman
to ﬁ nd. My un cles, her br others, talk ed her out of it, but they
agr eed she needed to do something drastic or she’d be the
one lying  dead.It w as an old  neighbor who showed her a way . Betty used to
live ac r oss the str eet fr om us and af ter she moved they
stayed in touch. Betty was twenty years older than my mom
and had the wisdom to match. She encouraged my mother
to plan  her escape weeks in advance. The ﬁrst step was
getting a cr edit car d in her name. That meant she had to r e -
ear n  T runnis’ trust because sh e needed him to cosign. Betty
also r eminded my mother to k eep their friendship a  secr et.
F or a few weeks Jackie played T runnis, tr eated him lik e she
did when she was a nineteen - year - old  beauty with stars in
her eyes. She made him believe she worshipped h im again,
and when she slipped a cr edit car d application in  fr ont of
him, h e said he’d be happy to scor e her a little buying
power . When  the car d ar r ived in the mail, my moth er felt its
har d plastic edges thr ough the envelope as r elief saturated
her mind. She held it a t ar ms length and admir ed it. It
glowed lik e a golden  tick et.
A fe w days later she hear d my father talking shit a bout her
on the phone to one of his friends, while he was having
br eakfast with my br other  and me at the kitchen table. That
did it. She w alk ed over to the table and said, “I’m leaving
your father . Y ou two can stay or you can come with  me.”
My dad was stunned silent and so was my br oth er, but I
shot out of th at chair lik e it was on ﬁr e, grabbed a few black
garbage bags, and went upstairs to start packing. My
br other eventually started gathering his things to o . Befor e
we lef t, the four of us had one last pow wow at that kitchen
table. T runnis glar ed at my mother, ﬁlled with shock and
contempt.
“Y ou have nothing and y ou ar e nothing without  me,” he
said. “Y ou’r e uneducated, you don’t have any money or
pr ospects. Y ou’ll be a pr ostitute inside a year .” He pausedthen shif ted his focus to my br other and me. “Y ou  two ar e
gonna gr ow up to be a couple of faggots. And do n’t think
about coming back, Jackie . I’ll have another woman her e to
tak e your place ﬁve minutes af ter you  leave.”
She nodded and stood. She’d given him her youth, her very
soul, and she was ﬁnally ﬁ nished. She pack ed as little of her
past as possible. She lef t  the mink coats and the  diamond
rings. He could give them  to his whor e girlfriend as far as
she was  concer ned.
T runnis watc hed us load up into my mom’s V olvo (the one
vehicle he owned that he wouldn’t ride in), our bik es alr eady
strapped to the back. W e dr ove oﬀ slowly and at ﬁrst he
didn’t budge, but befor e she tur ned the cor ner I could see
him move towar d the garage. My mother ﬂoor ed  it.
Give her cr edit, she’d planned for contingencies. She ﬁgur ed
he’d tail her, so she didn’t head west to the interstate that
would tak e us to her par e nt’s place in Indiana. Instead, she
dr ove to Betty’s house, d own a dirt construction r oad that
my dad didn’t even know  about. Betty had the gar age door
open when we ar rived. W e pulled in. Betty yank ed the door
down, and while my father shot out on the highw ay in his
Corvette to chase af ter us, we waited right under his nose
until just befor e nightfa ll. By then we knew he ’d be at
Sk ateland, op ening up. He wasn’t going to miss a c hance to
mak e some money . No matter  what.
Shit we nt wr o ng about ninety miles outside of Buﬀalo when
the ol d V olvo started bur ning oil. Huge plumes  of ink y
e xhaust chok ed fr om the tail pipe and my mother spun into
panic m ode. It was as if she’d been holding it all in, stuﬃng
her fe ar down deep, hiding it beneath a mask of for ced
composur e, until an obstacle emer ged and she fell apart.
T ears str eak ed her  face.“What do I do?” My mom ask ed, her eyes wide as saucers.
My br other never wanted to leave, and he told her to tur n
ar ound. I was riding shotgun. She look ed over e xpectantly .
“What do I  do?”
“W e gotta go, mom,” I said. “Mom, we gotta  go .”
She pulled into a gas s tation in the middle of nowher e.
Hysterical, she rushed to a pay phone and called  Betty .
“I can’t do t his, Betty,” she said. “The car br ok e down. I
have to go  back!”
“Wher e ar e you?” Betty ask ed, calmly .
“I don’t know,” my mom r eplied. “I have no idea wher e I
am!”
Betty t old her to ﬁnd a gas station attendant—every station
had th ose b ack then—a nd put him on the ph one. He
e xplained we wer e just outside of Erie, P ennsylvania, and
af ter Betty gave him som e instructions, he put my mother
back on the  line.
“ Jackie, ther e ’s a V olvo dealer in Erie. F ind a hote l tonight
and tak e the car ther e tomor r ow mor ning. The attendant is
going to put enough oil in the car to get you th er e.” My
mother was listening but she didn’t r espond. “ Jackie? Ar e
you hearing me? Do what I say and it will be  ok ay .”
“Y eah. Ok ay ,” she whisper ed, emotionally spent. “ Hotel.
V olvo dealer . Got  it.”
I do n’t know what Erie is lik e now, but back then t her e was
only one decent hotel in town: a Holiday Inn, not  far fr om
the V olvo dealership. My br other and I followed my  mom to
the r ec eption desk wher e  we wer e hit with mor e bad news.They wer e fully book ed. My mother’s shoulders slumped. My
br other and I stood on eit her side of her, holding ou r clothes
in black trash bags. W e wer e the pictur e of desperation, and
the night manager saw  it.
“ L ook, I’ll set you up w ith some r ollaway beds in the
confer ence r oom,” he said. “Ther e’s a bathr oom down ther e,
but you have to be out ea rly because we have a co nfer ence
starting at 9 a.m.”
Grateful, we bedded down in that confer ence r oom  with its
industrial ca rpet and ﬂuor escent lights, our own  personal
pur gatory . W e wer e on the run and on the r opes, but my
mother hadn’t folded. She laid back and star ed at the ceiling
tiles un til we nodded oﬀ. Then she slipped into an adjacent
coﬀee shop to k eep an anxious eye on our bik es, and on the
r oad, all night  long.
W e wer e waiting outside that V olvo dealership when the
garage opened up, which gave the mechanics just enough
time to  sour c e the part w e needed and get us ba ck on the
r oad b efor e their day was done. W e lef t Erie at sunset and
dr ove all night, ar riving at my grandpar ents’ house in Brazil,
Indiana, eight hours later .  My mom wept as she park ed ne xt
to thei r old wooden house befor e dawn, and I un derstood
why .
Our ar rival felt signiﬁcan t, then and now . I was still only
eight y ears o ld, but alr eady in a second phase of life. I didn’t
know what awaited me—what awaited us—in that small,
rural, Souther n Indiana town, and I didn’t much car e. All I
knew was that we’d escap ed fr om Hell, and for the  ﬁrst time
in my life, we wer e fr ee fr om the Devil  himself .
* * *W e stayed with my grandpar ents for the ne xt six months,
and I enr olled in second grade—for the second time—at a
local Catholic school called Annunciation. I was the only
eight - year - old  in second grade, but none of the other kids
knew I was r epeating a year, and ther e was no doubt that I
needed it. I could bar ely  r ead, but I was luck y enough to
have Sister K atherine as m y teacher . Short and petite, Sister
K atherine wa s sixty years old and had one gold fr o nt tooth.
She was a nun but didn’t wear the habit. She was also
grumpy as hell and took no shit, and I loved her thug  ass.
Second grade in BrazilAnnunciation was a small school. Sister K atherine taught all
of ﬁ rst and second grad e in a single classr oom, and with
only eighteen  kids to teach, she wasn’t willing to shirk her
r esponsibility and blame my academic struggles, or
anybody’s b ad behavio r, on lear ning disab ilities or
emotional pr oblems. She  didn’t know my backstory and
didn’t have to . All that matter ed to her was that I t ur ned up
at h er door with a kinde r garten education, and it  was her
job to shape my mind. She had every e x cuse in the world to
far m m e out to some spe cialist or label me a pr oblem, but
that wasn’t her style. She started teaching befor e labeling
kids was a nor mal thing to do, and she embodie d the no -
e x cuses  mentality that I needed if I was going to catch  up.
Sister K atherine is the r eason why I’ll never trust a  smile or
judge a scowl. My dad smiled a hell of a lot, and he didn’t
give tw o shits about me, but gr ouchy Sister K atherine car ed
about us, car ed about me. She wanted us to be our very
best. I know this because  she pr oved it by spend ing e xtra
time with me, as much time as it took, until I r etained my
lessons. Befo r e the year was out, I could r ead at a second
grade level. T runnis Jr . hadn’t adjusted nearly as well. W ithin
a few month s he was bac k in Buﬀalo, shadowing my father
and working that Sk ateland detail lik e he’d never  lef t.
By then, we’d moved into  a place of our own: a 600- squar e -
foot , two - bedr oom  apartment at Lamplight Manor, a public
housing block, that cost  us $7 a month. My father, who
ear ned thous ands every night, sporadically sent $ 25 every
thr ee or four weeks (if that) for child support, while my
mother ear ned a few hundr ed dollars a month with her
department stor e job. In her oﬀ - hours  s he was taking
courses at Indiana State University, which cost money too .
The point is, we had gaps to ﬁll, so my mother enr olled in
welfar e and r eceived $123 a month and food stamps. They
wr ote her a c heck for the ﬁrst month, but when th ey foundout she  owned a car they  disqualiﬁed her, e xplaining that if
she sold her car they’d be happy to  help.
The pr oblem is we lived in  a rural town with a population of
about 8,000 that didn’t have a mass transit sys tem. W e
needed that car so I could get to school, and so s he could
get to work and tak e night classes. She was hell - bent  on
changing he r life cir cumstances and found a wo rk ar ound
thr ough the Aide to Dependent Childr en pr ogram. She
ar ranged for our check to  go to my grandmother w ho signed
it over to her, but that didn’t mak e life easy . How far can
$123 r eally  go?
I vi vidly r ecall one night we wer e so br ok e we dr ove home
on a gas tan k that was n ear empty, to a bar e r e frigerator
and a past due electric bill, with no money in the ba nk. Then
I r eme mber ed that we had two mason jars ﬁlled with
pennies and other loose  change. I grabbed them oﬀ the
shelf .
“Mom, let’s count our  change!”
She smiled. Gr owing up, her father had taught he r to pick
up the change she found on the str eet. He was molded by
the Gr e at De pr ession and  knew what it was lik e to be down
and ou t. “Y ou never know when you might need it,” he’d
say . When we lived in H ell, car rying home thousands of
dollars every  night, the no tion that we would ever run out of
money soun ded ludicr ou s, but my mother r etained her
childhood ha bit. T runnis used to belittle her for it, but now it
was time to see how far found money could tak e  us.
W e dumped that change out on the living r oom ﬂoor and
counted out enough to cover the electric bill, ﬁll the gas
tank, and buy gr oceries. W e even had enough to buy
bur gers at Har dee’s on the way home. These w er e darktimes, but we wer e managing. Bar ely . My mother missed
T runnis Jr . ter ribly, but she  was pleased that I was adjusting
and making friends. I’d ha d a good year at school, and fr om
our ﬁrst night in Indian a I hadn’t wet the bed once. It
seemed that I was healing, but my demons wer en’t gone.
They w er e dor mant. And when they came back,  they hit
har d.
* * *
Thir d grade was a shock to my system. Not just because we
had to lear n cursive when I was still getting the hang of
r eading block  letters, but because our teacher, Ms. D, was
nothing lik e Sister K ather ine. Our class was still small, we
had about twenty kids total, split between thir d and fourth
grade, but she didn’t handle it nearly as well and wasn’t
inter ested in taking the e xtra time I  r equir ed.
My tr ou ble started with the standar dized test we took during
our ﬁrs t coup le of weeks of class. Mine came back a mess. I
was still way behind the other kids and I had tr ouble
building on lessons fr om the pr evious days, let a lone the
pr evious aca demic year . Sister K atherine consider ed similar
signs as cues to dedica te mor e time with her weak est
student, and she challen ged me daily . Ms. D look ed for a
way ou t. W ith in the ﬁrst m onth of class, she told my mother
that I belonged in a d iﬀer ent school. One for “special
students.”
Every kid knows what “special” means. It means you ar e
about to be stigmatized for the r est of your dam n life. It
means that you ar e not  nor mal. The thr eat alone was a
trigger, and I developed a stutter almost over night. My
thought - to - speech  ﬂow was jammed up with str ess and
anxiety, and it was at its worst in  school.Imagine being the only black kid in class, in the entir e
school, and enduring the daily humiliation of also being the
dumbest. I felt lik e everything I tried to do or say was
wr ong, and it got so ba d that instead of r esponding and
skipping lik e scratched vinyl whenever the teacher called
my na me, I of ten chose to k eep quiet. It was all about
limiting e xposur e to save  face.
Ms. D didn’t even attemp t to empathize. She went straight
to f rustration  and vented it by yelling at me, sometimes
when she was leaning down, her hand on the ba ck of my
chair, her face just inches fr om my own. She had no idea the
P andora’s bo x she was tearing open. Once, school was a
safe ha rbor, the one place I knew I couldn’t be hurt, but in
Indiana it morphed into my tortur e  chamber .
Ms. D  wanted me out of her classr oom, and the
administration supported her until my mother fought for me.
The pr incipal agr eed to k eep me enr olled if my mother
signed oﬀ on time with a speech therapist and pu t me into
gr oup therapy with a local shrink they  r ecommended.
The psychologist’s oﬃce was adjacent to a hospital, which
was e x actly w her e you’d want to put it if you wer e trying to
mak e a  little kid doubt himself . It was lik e a bad m ovie. The
shrink set up seven chair s in a semicir cle ar ound him, but
some o f the kids wouldn’t  or couldn’t sit still. One child wor e
a h elmet and banged his head against the wall r epeatedly .
Another kid stood up while the doctor was mid - sentence ,
walk ed towar d a far cor ner of the r oom, and piss ed in the
trash c an. The kid sitting ne xt to me was the most nor mal
person in the gr oup, and he had set his own house  on ﬁr e! I
can r ememb er staring up at the shrink on my ﬁrst day,
thinking, There’s no way I belong  here .That e xperience kick ed my social anxiety up several
notches. My  stutter was out of contr ol. My hair started
falling out, and white spl otches bloomed on my dark skin.
The doctor diagnosed me  as an ADHD case and pr escribed
Ritalin, but my pr oblems wer e mor e  comple x.
I was suﬀering fr om to xic  str ess.
The type of p hysical and emotional abuse I was e xposed to
has been pr oven to have  a range of side eﬀects on young
childr en bec ause in our early years the brain g r ows and
develops so rapidly . If, during those years, your father is an
evil motherfuck er hell - bent  on destr oying everyone in his
house, str es s spik es, and when those spik es occur
fr equently enough, you can draw a line acr oss the peaks.
That’s your new baseline.  It puts kids in a per manent “ﬁght
or ﬂigh t” mode. F ight or ﬂight can be a gr eat tool when
you’r e in danger because  it amps you up to battle thr ough
or sprint fr om tr ouble, but it’s no way to  live.
I’m no t the type of guy to try to e xplain everyt hing with
science, but facts ar e facts. I’ve r ead that some
pediatricians believe to xic str ess does mor e damage to kids
than polio or meningitis.  I know ﬁrsthand that it  leads to
lear ning disabilities and social anxiety because accor ding to
doctors it limits language development and memo ry, which
mak es it diﬃcult for even the most gif ted student to r ecall
what they have alr eady le ar ned. L ooking at the long game,
when kids lik e me gr ow u p, they face an incr eased risk for
clinical depr ession, heart disease, obesity, and cancer, not
to me ntion smoking, alcoholism, and drug abuse. Those
raised in abusive househ olds have an incr eased pr obability
of b eing ar r ested as a juv enile by 53 per cent. Their odds of
committing a violent crim e as an adult ar e incr eased by 38
per cent. I was the poster child of that generic ter m we’ve all
hear d befor e: “ at - risk  yo uth.” My mother was n’t the oneraising a thug. L ook at the numbers and it’s clear : if anyone
put me on a destructive path it was T runnis  Goggins.
I didn’t stay in gr oup therapy for long, and I di dn’t tak e
Ritalin eithe r . My mom pick ed me up af ter my second
session and I sat in the fr ont seat of her car w earing a
thousand - yar d  star e. “Mom, I’m not going back,” I said.
“These boys ar e crazy .” She  agr eed.
But I was still a damage d kid, and while ther e ar e pr oven
interventions on the best way to teach and manage kids
who su ﬀer fr o m to xic str ess, it’s fair to say that Ms. D didn’t
get those memos. I can’t  blame her for her own ignorance.
The sc ience w asn’t nearly  as clear in the 1980s as it is now .
All I know is, Sister K atherine toiled in the tr enches with the
same malfor med kid th at Ms. D dealt with, but she
maintained high e xpectations and didn’t let her frustration
overwhelm her . She had  the mindset of, Look, everybody
learns in a diﬀerent way and we’re gonna ﬁgure out how
you learn . She deduced that I needed r epetition. That I
needed to solve the same pr oblems over and over again in a
diﬀer ent way to lear n, and she knew that took time. Ms. D
was all about pr oductivity . She was saying, K eep up or get
out . Mean while, I felt back ed into a cor ner . I knew that if I
didn’t show some impr ovement I would even tually be
shipped out to that special black hole for good, so I f ound a
solution.
I started cheating my ass  oﬀ.
Studying was har d, especially with my fuck ed - up  bra in, but I
was a damn good cheat . I copied friends’ homework and
scanned my neighbors’ work during tests. I even copied the
answers on the standar dized tests that didn’t have any
impact on my grades. It work ed! My rising test scor es
placated Ms.  D, and my mother stopped getting calls fr omschool. I thought I’d solved a pr oblem when r eally I was
cr eating new  ones by taking the path of least r esist ance. My
coping mechanism conﬁr med that I would never lear n squat
at sch ool, and that I wou ld never catch up, which pushed
me closer towar d a ﬂunk ed out  fate.
The saving grace of thos e early years in Brazil was that I
was way too young to understand the kind of pr ejudice I
would soon face in my new hick hometown. Whenever
you’r e the only  o ne of your kind, you’r e in danger of being
pushed towa r d the mar gins, suspected and dis r egar ded,
bullied and mistr eated by ignorant people. That’s just the
way lif e is, especially back  then, and by the time that r eality
kick ed me in the thr oat, my life had alr eady become a full -
ﬂedged , fuck - you  fo rtune cookie. Whenever I crack ed it
open, I got the same  message.
Y ou wer e bor n to  fail!C H A L L E N G E  # 1
My bad car ds ar rived ea rly and stuck ar ound a w hile, but
everyone ge ts challenged in life at some point. What was
your bad hand? What kin d of bullshit did you con tend with
gr owing up? W er e you beaten? Abused? Bullied? Did you
ever feel insecur e? Mayb e your limiting factor is that you
gr ew up so supported and comfortable, you never pushed
yourself?
What ar e the cur r ent factors limiting your gr owth and
success? Is someone st anding in your way at work or
school? Ar e you under appr eciated and overlook ed for
opportunities? What ar e the long odds you’r e up against
right now? Ar e you standing in your own  way?
Br eak out your jour nal—i f you don’t have one, buy one, or
start o ne on your laptop, tablet, or in the notes app on your
smart phone—and write them all out in minute detail. Don’t
be bland with this assignment. I showed you every piece of
my dirty laundry . If you wer e hurt or ar e still in har m’s way,
tell the story in full. Give your pain shape. Absorb its power,
because you ar e about to ﬂip that  shit.
Y ou will use y our story, this list of e x cuses, these very good
r easons why you shouldn ’t amount to a damn thin g, to fuel
your ultimate success. So unds fun right? Y eah, it won’t be.
But don’t wor ry about that yet. W e’ll get ther e. F or  now, just
tak e  inventory .
Once y ou have your list, shar e it with whoever you want. F or
some, it may mean logg ing onto social media, posting a
pictur e, and writing out a few lines about how your  own pastor p r esent cir cumstances challenge you to the depth of your
soul. If that’s you, use the hashtags #badhand
#canthurtme. Otherwise , acknowledge and accept it
privately . Whatever works for you. I know it’s har d , but this
act alone will begin to empower you to  over come.C H A P T E R  T W O
2 .  TRUTH HUR TS
W ILMOTH  I R VING  W AS  A  NEW  BEGINNING . U P  UNTIL  HE  MET  MY  MOTHER  AND
ask ed for her phone num ber, all I’d known was m isery and
struggle. When the mone y was good, our lives wer e deﬁned
by trau ma. Once we wer e fr ee of my father, we wer e swept
under by our own PTSD-level dysfunction and poverty . Then,
when I was i n fourth grade, she met W ilmoth, a successful
carpenter an d general contractor fr om Indianapolis . She was
attracted to his easy smil e and laid-back style. Ther e was no
violence in him. He gave us per mission to e xhale. W ith him
ar ound it felt lik e we had some support, lik e something good
was ﬁnally happening to  us.W ith W ilmoth
She laughed when they w er e together . Her smile was bright
and r e al. She stood up a  little straighter . He gave her pride
and made her feel beautiful again. As for me, W ilmoth
became as close to a healthy father ﬁgur e as I’ve ever had.
He didn’t coddle me. He d idn’t tell me he loved me or any of
that fak e - ass  sappy shit, but he was ther e. Bask etball had
been an obsession of mi ne since grade school. It was the
cor e of my r e lationship with my best friend, Johnn y Nichols,
and W ilmoth  had game. H e and I hit the courts together all
the tim e. He showed me moves, tuned up my defensive
discipline, an d helped me develop a jump shot. The thr ee of
us cel ebrated birthdays and holidays together,  and the
summer befor e eighth gr ade, he got down on one knee and
ask ed my mother to mak e it  oﬃcial.
W ilmoth lived  in Indianapolis, and our plan was to move in
with him the following summer . Though he wasn’t nearly as
rich as T runnis, he made a nice living and we look ed forwar d
to city life a gain. Then in 1989, the day af ter C hristmas,
everything  stopped.
W e hadn’t made the full time move to Indy yet, and he’d
spent Christm as Day with us at my grandpar ents’ place in
Brazil. The ne xt day, he had a bask etball game in his men’s
league and he’d invited m e to sub for one of his teammates.
I wa s s o e x ci ted I’d pack ed my bags two days early, but that
mor ning he told me I couldn’t come af ter  all.
“I’m gonna k eep you bac k her e this time, Little D avid,” he
said. I  dr opped my head and sighed. He could tell I was
upset a nd tri ed to r eassur e me. “Y our mom is gonna drive up
in a few days and we can play ball  then.”
I nodd ed, r eluctantly, bu t I wasn’t raised to pry into the
aﬀairs of adults and knew I wasn’t owed an e xplanation ormak e - up  g ame. My mother and I watched fr om the fr on t
por ch as he back ed out o f the carport, smiled, and gave us
that crisp single wave of his. Then he dr ove  oﬀ.
It was the last time we’d ever see him  alive.
He pla yed in his men’s le ague game that night, as planned,
and dr ove home alone to  the “house with the wh ite lions.”
Whenever he gave dir ections to friends, family, or delivery
guys, t hat’s h ow he always described his ranch - style  house,
its d riveway framed by tw o white lion sculptur es elevated on
pillars. He pulled betwee n them and into the garage wher e
he could enter the house dir ectly, oblivious to the danger
moving in fr om behind. He never did close that garage  door .
They’d been staking him out for hours, waiting for a window,
and as he c limbed out fr om the driver’s side door, they
stepped fr om the shadow s and ﬁr ed fr om close range. He
was sh ot ﬁve times in the chest. When he dr opp ed to the
ﬂoor of his garage, the  gunman stepped over him and
deliver ed a kill shot right between his  eyes.
W ilmoth’s father lived a few blocks away, and when he dr ove
by the  white lions the n e xt mor ning, he noticed his son’s
garage door open and knew something was wr ong. He
walk ed up the driveway and into the garage wher e he
sobbed over his dead  son.
W ilmoth was just forty - thr ee  years  old.
I was still at my grandmother’s house when W ilmoth’s
mother called moments la ter . She hung up and motioned me
to her  side to br eak the news. I thought about my mom.
W ilmoth had  been her savior . She’d been coming out of her
shell, openin g up, r eady to believe in good things. What
would this do to her? W ould God ever give her a damn
br eak? It started as a sim mer but within seconds my rageoverwhelmed me. I br ok e fr ee of my grandmother, punched
the r efrigerator, and lef t a  dent.
W e dr o ve to our place to  ﬁnd my mother, who was alr eady
frantic because she hadn’t hear d fr om W ilmoth. She called
his house just befor e we ar rived, and when a detective
pick ed up the phone it p uzzled her, but she didn’t e xpect
this. H ow could she? W e saw her confusion  as my
grandmother walk ed over, peeled the phone fr om her
ﬁngers, and sat her  down.
She didn’t believe us at ﬁrst. W ilmoth was a prankster and
this wa s just the kind of fuck ed - up  stu nt he mig ht try to pul l
oﬀ. Then she r emember ed he’d been shot two months
befor e. He’d told her the guys who’d done that wer en’t af ter
him. That those bullets wer e meant for someone else, and
because they mer ely grazed him, she decided to for get
about the whole thing. Until that moment, she never
suspected th at W ilmoth had some secr et str eet life she knew
nothing abou t, and the police never did ﬁnd out e x actly why
he wa s shot and killed. The speculation was that he was
involved in a shady business deal or a drug deal gone bad.
My mother was still in denial when she pack ed a bag, but she
included a dr ess for his  funeral.
When we ar rived, his ho use was wrapped in a ribbon of
yellow police tape lik e a fuck ed - up  Christmas gif t. This was
no prank. My mom park ed, duck ed under the tape, and I
followed right behind he r to the fr ont door . On the way, I
r emember gl ancing to my lef t trying to get a glimpse of the
scene wher e W ilmoth had  been killed. His cold blood was still
pooled on the garage ﬂoor . I was a fourteen - year - old
wandering thr ough an active crime scene, but nobody, not
my mother, not W ilmoth ’s family, and not even the police
seemed disturbed by me being ther e, absorbing the heavy
vibe of my would - be  stepfather’s  mur der .As fuck ed up as it sound s, the police allowed my mom to
stay in W ilmoth’s house that night. R ather than s tay alone,
she ha d her br other - in - law  ther e, ar med with his two guns in
case the killers came back. I wound up in a back bedr oom at
W ilmoth’s si ster’s place, a dark and spook y house a few
miles away, and lef t alone all night. The house was fur nished
with one of those analog, cabinet television sets with
thirteen channels on a dial. Only thr ee channels came in
static - fr ee , and I k ept it on the local news. They ran the same
tape on a loo p every thirty minutes: footage of my  mom and
me ducking under police tape then watching W ilmoth get
wheeled on a gur ney tow ar d a waiting ambulance, a sheet
over his  body .
It was lik e a hor r or scene. I sat ther e all alone, watching the
same f ootage over and over . My mind was a br ok en r ecor d
that k ept skipping into d arkness. The past had been bleak
and no w our sk y - blue  futur e had been blown the fuck up too .
Ther e would be no r eprieve, only my familiar fuck ed - up
r eality choking out all light. Each time I watched, my fear
gr ew until it ﬁlled the r oom, and still I could not  stop.
A few days af ter we buried W ilmoth, and just af ter the new
year, I boar ded a school bus in Brazil, Indiana. I was still
grieving, and my head was spinning because my mother and
I ha dn’t decided whether or not we wer e staying i n Brazil or
moving to Indianapolis as  planned. W e wer e in limbo and she
r emained in a state of shock. She still hadn’t cried over
W ilmoth’s de ath. Instead  she became emotiona lly vacant
again. It was as if all the  pain she’d e xperienced in her life
r esurfaced as one gaping wound she disappear ed into, and
ther e was no r eaching h er in that void. In the meantime,
school was starting up, so I played along, looking for any
shr ed of nor mal I could hang  onto .But it was har d. I r ode a  bus to school most day s, and my
ﬁrst day back, I couldn’t shak e a memory I’d buried  fr om the
year befor e. That mor ning, I slid into a seat above the back
lef t tir e overlooking the str eet as usual. When we ar rived at
school the bus pulled up to the curb, we needed to wait for
the on es ahe ad of us to move befor e we could get oﬀ. In the
meantime, a car pulled alongside us, and a cute, over eager
little boy ran towar d our  bus car rying a platter o f cookies.
The driver didn’t see him. The bus jerk ed  forwar d.
I no ticed the alar med loo k on his mother’s face b efor e the
sudden crush of blood splatter ed my window . His mother
howled in hor r or . She wasn’t among us anymor e. She look ed
and sounded lik e a ﬁer ce, wounded animal as she literally
pulled the hair fr om her head by the r oots. Soon sir ens
wailed in the distance an d scr eamed closer by the second.
The little boy was about six years old. The cooki es wer e a
pr esent for the  driver .
W e wer e all or der ed oﬀ the bus, and as I walk ed by the
tragedy, for some r eason —call it human curiosity, call it the
magnetic pu ll of dark to dark—I peek ed under the bus and
saw him . His head was nearly as ﬂat as paper, his b rains and
blood mingled under the car riage lik e spent  oil.
F or a full year I hadn’t tho ught of that image even once, but
W ilmoth’s death r eawak ened it, and now it was all I could
think a bout. I was beyond the pale. Nothing matter ed to me.
I’d seen enough to kno w that the world was ﬁlled with
human trage dy and that it would just k eep piling up in drif ts
until it swallowed  me.
I co uldn’t sleep in bed a nymor e. Neither could my mother .
She slept in her ar m chair with the television on blast or with
a book  in her hands. F or a  little while, I tried to curl up in bed
at night but would alway s wak e in the fetal positi on on the
ﬂoor . Eventu ally I gave in and bedded down low to thegr ound. Mayb e because I knew if I could ﬁnd comfort at the
bottom place ther e would be no mor e  falling.
W e wer e two people in  dir e need of the fr esh start we
thought we had coming, so even without W ilmoth, we made
the mo ve to Indianapolis . My mother set me up for entry
e xams at Cathedral H igh School, a private  college
pr eparatory academy in the heart of the city . A s usual, I
cheated, and oﬀ a smart motherfuck er too . When my
acceptance letter and cla ss schedule came in the mail the
summer befor e fr eshman year, I was looking at a full slate of
AP  classes!
I hack ed my way thr ough, cheating and copying, and
managed to mak e the fr eshman bask etball team, which was
one of  the best fr eshman teams in the entir e stat e. W e had
several futur e college players, and I started at point guar d.
That w as a conﬁdence boost, but not the kind I could build
on bec ause I knew I was an academic fraud. Plus, the school
cost m y mom way too m uch money, so af ter only one year
at Cathedral, she pulled the  plug.
I s tarte d my sophomor e year at North Central High School, a
public school with 4,000 kids in a majority black
neighbor hood, and on m y ﬁrst day I tur ned up lik e some
pr eppy - ass  white boy . M y jeans wer e deﬁnitely too tight, and
my collar ed shirt was tuck ed into a waistline cinched with a
braided belt. The only r ea son I didn’t get completely laughed
out of the building was because I could  ball.
My sophomo r e year was all about being cool. I sw itched up
my war dr obe, which was incr easingly inﬂuenced by hip hop
cultur e, and hung out with gang bangers and other
bor derline delinquents, which meant I didn’t always go to
school. One day, my mom came home in the mid dle of the
day an d found me sitting ar ound our dining r oom table with
what s he des cribed as “ten thugs.” She wasn’t wr ong. W ithina few weeks she pack ed us up and moved us back to Brazil,
Indiana.
I en r olled at Northview High School the week of bask etball
tryouts, and I r emember showing up at lunch time when the
cafeteria was full. Ther e wer e 1,200 kids enr olled at
Northview, o nly ﬁve of which wer e black, and the last time
any of them had seen me I look ed a lot lik e them. Not
anymor e.
I str olled into school that day wearing pants ﬁve siz es too big
and sa gged way down low . I also wor e an oversized Chicago
Bulls Jack et with a backw ar d hat, cock ed to the si de. W ithin
seconds, all eyes wer e upon me. T eachers, students, and
administrative staﬀ star ed at me lik e I was some e x otic
species. I was the ﬁrst thuggish black kid many of  them had
seen in r eal life. My mer e pr esence had stopped the music. I
was the needle being dragged acr oss vinyl, scratching a
whole new r hythm, and lik e hip hop itself, everybody noticed
but not everyone lik ed what they hear d. I strutted thr ough
the scene lik e I gave no  fucks.
But that was a lie. I acted  all kinds of cock y and my entrance
was br ash as hell, but I felt very insecur e going back ther e.
Buﬀalo had been lik e living in a blazing infer no . My early
years in Brazil wer e a perfect incubator for post traumatic
str ess, and befor e I lef t I was deliver ed a doubl e dose of
death traum a. Moving to Indianapolis had been an
opportunity to escape pit y and leave all that behind. Class
wasn’t easy for me, but I’d made friends and developed a
new st yle. N ow, coming back, I look ed diﬀer ent enough on
the outside to perpetuate  an illusion that I’d chang ed, but in
or der to change you hav e to work thr ough shit. C onfr ont it
and get r eal. I hadn’t done a shr ed of that har d work. I was
still a dumb k id with nothing solid to lean on, and bask etball
tryouts ripped away any conﬁdence I had  lef t.When I got to the gym, they made me suit - up  in unifor m
rather than wear my mo r e generic gym clothes. Back then
the style was getting baggy and oversized, which Chris
W ebber and Jalen R ose of the F ab F ive would mak e famous at
the Universit y of Michigan. The coaches in Brazil didn’t have
their ﬁngers on that pulse. They put me in the tighty - whitey
version of bask etball shorts, which strangled my balls,
hugged my thighs super tight, and felt all kinds of wr ong. I
was trapped in the coach es’ pr efer r ed dr eam state: a Lar ry
Bir d time warp. Which made sense because Lar ry L egend
was basically  a patr on sa int in Brazil and all of Indiana. In
fact, h is daughter went to our school. W e wer e friends. But
that didn’t mean I wanted to dr ess lik e  him!
Then t her e was my etiquette. In Indianapolis the coaches let
us t alk shit on the court. If I made a good move or hit a shot
in your  face, I talk ed about your mama or your girlfriend. In
Indy, I’d done r esear ch on my shit talking. I got good at it. I
was the Draymond Gr een of my school, and it was all part of
bask etball cultur e in the city . Back in far m country, that cost
me. When tryouts started , I handled the r ock a bunch, and
when I cr ossed some of the kids over and made them look
bad I let them and the coaches know . My attitude
embar rassed the coaches (who wer e appar ently ignorant
that th eir her o, Lar ry L egend, was an all - time  gr eat trash
talk er), and it wasn’t long  befor e they took the ball  out of my
hands and put me in th e fr ont court, a position I’d never
played befor e. I was uncomfortable down low, and played
lik e it.  That  shut me u p good. Meanwhile, Jo hnny was
dominating.
My on ly saving grace that week was getting back with
Johnny Nichols. W e’d stay ed close while I was away and our
marathon one - on - one  battles wer e back on full swing.
Though he was undersize d, he was always a nice player and
he was one of the best on the ﬂoor during tryouts. He wasdraining shot s, seeing the open man, and running the court.
It w as no sur prise when he made the varsity squa d, but we
wer e both shock ed that I bar ely made  JV .
I was crushed. And not because of bask etball tryouts. T o me
that outcome was another symptom of something else I’d
been f eeling. Brazil look e d the same, but shit fel t diﬀer ent
this time ar ound. Grade school had been har d academically,
but ev en tho ugh we wer e one of only a few black families in
town, I didn’t notice or feel any palpable racism. As a
teenager I e xperienced it everywher e, and it wasn’t because
I’d become ultra sensitive . Outright racism had always  been
ther e.
Not long af ter moving back to Brazil, my cousin Damien and I
went t o a party way out in the country . W e stayed out well
past curfew . In fact, we wer e up all night long, and af ter
daybr eak we called our grandmother for a ride  home.
“Ex cuse me? ” She ask ed. “Y ou disobeyed me, so you may as
well start  walking.”
R oger  that.
She lived ten miles away, down a long country r oa d, but we
jok ed a r ound and enjoyed  ourselves as we started to str oll.
Damien lived in Indianap olis and we wer e both sagging our
baggy jeans and dr essed in oversized Starter jack ets, not
e xactly typical gear on Brazil’s country r oads. W e’d walk ed
seven miles in a few hours when a pick - up  truck came
bouncing down the tar ma c in our dir ection. W e edged to the
side of the r oad to let it pass, but it slowed down, and as it
cr ept past us, we could see two teenagers in the cab and a
thir d standing  in the bed of the truck. The passeng er pointed
and yelled thr ough his open  window .
“Niggers!”W e didn’t over r eact. W e  put our heads down and k ept
walking at the same pac e, until we hear d that beat - to - shit
truck squeal to a stop on a patch of gravel, and kick up a
dust stor m. That’s when I tur ned and saw the passenger, a
scruﬀy lookin g r edneck, e xit the cab of the truck with a pistol
in his hand. He aimed it at my head as he stalk ed towar d  me.
“Wher e the fuck you fr om , and why the fuck you her e in this
fucking  town?!”
Damien eased down the r oad, while I lock ed eyes with the
gunman and said nothing . He stepped within two feet of me.
The th r eat of violence doesn’t get much mor e r eal than that.
Chills r ippled my skin, but I r efused to run or cower . A f ter a
few seconds he got back in the truck and they sped  oﬀ.
It wasn ’t the ﬁrst time I’ d hear d the wor d. Not long befor e
that I was hanging out in P izza Hut with Johnny and a couple
of girls , including a brunette I lik ed, named P am. She lik ed
me too, but we’d never a cted on it. W e wer e two innocents
enjoying one another’s company, but when her father
ar rived to tak e her home he caught sight of us, and when
P am saw him, her face went ghost  white.
He burst into the pack ed r estaurant and stalk ed towar d us
with all eyes on him. He never addr essed me. He just lock ed
eyes with her and said, “ I don’t want to ever  see  yo u sitti ng
with this nigger  again.”
She hu stled o ut the door af ter him, her face r ed with shame
as I sat, pa ralyzed, staring at the ﬂoor . It was the most
humiliating m oment of my life, and it hurt much m or e than
the gun incident because it happened in public, and  the wor d
had been spewed by a gr own - ass  man. I couldn’t understand
how or why he was ﬁlled with so much hate, and if he felt
that way, how many other people in Brazil shar ed his point ofview when they saw me walking down the str eet? It was the
sort of riddle you didn’t want to  solve.
* * *
They w on’t call on me if they can’t see me.  That was how I
operated dur ing my sophomor e year in high school in Brazil,
Indiana. I would hide out in the back r ows, slump low in my
chair, and sidestep my w ay thr ough each and every class.
Our high school made us  tak e a for eign language that year,
which was funny to me. Not because I couldn’t see the value,
but because I could bar ely  r ead English, let alone understand
Spanish. By then, af ter a  good eight years of che ating, my
ignorance had crystalized. I k ept leveling up in s chool, on
track, but hadn’t lear ned a damn thing. I was one of those
kids w ho thought he was gaming the system when, the
whole time, I’d been gaming  myself .
One m or ning, about half way thr ough the school yea r, I milled
into Sp anish class and grabbed my workbook fr o m a back
cupboar d. Ther e was technique involved in sk ating by . Y ou
didn’t have to pay attention, but you did have to mak e it
seem lik e you wer e, so I slumped into my seat, opened up
my wo rkbook, and ﬁx ed  my gaze on the tea cher who
lectur ed fr om the fr ont of the  r oom.
When I look ed down at the page the whole r oom went silent.
A t l east to m e. Her lips w er e still moving, but I cou ldn’t hear
because my attention had  nar r owed on the message lef t for
me, and me  alone.
W e each had our own as signed workbook in that class, and
my nam e wa s written in p encil at the top right cor ner of the
title pa ge. That’s how they knew it was mine. Below that,
someone had  drawn an image of me in a noose. It look edrudimentary, lik e something out of the hangman game we
used to play as kids. Below that wer e the  wor ds.
Niger we’re gonna kill  you!
They’d misspelled it, but I had no clue. I could bar ely spell
myself, and they’d made their fucking point. I look ed ar ound
the r oom as my rage gather ed lik e a typhoon until it was
literally buzzing in my ears. I’m not supposed to be here , I
thought to myself . I’m not supposed to be back in  Brazil!
I took invent ory of all the incidents I’d alr eady e x perienced
and decided I couldn’t tak e much mor e. The teacher was still
talking when  I r ose up without war ning. She called my name
but I wasn’t trying to hear . I lef t the classr oom, notebook in
hand, and bolted to the p rincipal’s oﬃce. I was so enraged I
didn’t even stop at the fr ont desk. I walk ed righ t into his
oﬃce and dr opped the evidence on his  desk.
“I’m tir ed of this shit,” I  said.
Kirk F r eeman was the principal at that time, and t o this day
he s till r emembers looking  up fr om his desk and seeing tears
in my eyes. It wasn’t some mystery why all this shit was
happening in  Brazil. Souther n Indiana had alway s  been a
hotbed of racists, and he knew it. F our years later , in 1995,
the K u Klux Klan would m ar ch down Brazil’s mai n drag on
Independence Day, in full hooded r egalia. The KKK was
active in Center P oint, a town located not ﬁf teen minutes
away, and kids fr om ther e went to our school. Som e of them
sat behind me in history class and told racist jok es for my
beneﬁt nearly every damn day . I wasn’t e xpecting some
investigation into who did it. Mor e than anything, in that
moment, I was looking for some compassion, and I could tell
fr om the look in P rincipal  F r eeman’s eyes he felt bad about
what I  was going thr oug h, but he was at a loss. He didn’t
know h ow to help me. Ins tead, he e xamined the drawing andthe message  for a long beat, then raised his eyes to mine,
r eady to console me with his wor ds of  wisdom.
“ David, this is sheer igno rance,” he said. “They don’t even
know how to spell  nigger .”
My life had been thr eatened, and that was the best he could
do . The loneliness I felt leaving his oﬃce is something I’ll
never for get.  It was scar y to think that ther e was  so much
hate ﬂowing  thr ough the halls and that someone I didn’t
even k now w anted me dead because of the color of my skin.
The same question k ept looping thr ough my mind : Who the
fuck is  out her e who hate s me lik e this? I had no idea who
my en emy was. W as it one of the r ednecks fr om history
class, or was it somebody I thought I was cool with but who
r eally d idn’t l ik e me at all ? It was one thing staring  down the
bar r el of a g un on the str eet or dealing with so me racist
par ent. A t least that shit  was honest. W ondering who else
felt that way in my school was a diﬀer ent kind of u nnerving,
and I couldn’t shak e it oﬀ. Even though I had plenty of
friends, all of them white, I couldn’t stop seeing the hidden
racism scrawled all over  the walls in invisible ink, which
made it e xtr emely har d to car ry the weight of being the  only .KKK in Center P oint in 1995—Center P oint is ﬁf teen minutes fr om my house in
Brazil
Most, if not all, minorities, women, and gay people in
America kno w that strain of loneliness well. Of wa lking into
r ooms wher e you ar e the only  o ne of your kind. Most w hite
men have no idea how har d it can be. I wish they did.
Because the n they’d know how it drains you. How some
days, a ll you want to do is  stay home and wallow b ecause to
go pub lic is to be comple tely e xposed, vulnerable to a world
that tracks and judges yo u. A t least that’s how it feels. The
truth is, you can’t tell for sur e when or if that i s actually
happening in a given moment. But it of ten feels lik e it, which
is its own kind of mindfuck. In Brazil, I was the only
everywher e I went. A t my table in the cafeteria, wher e Ichilled at lunch with Johnny and our cr ew . In eve ry class I
took. Even in the damn bask etball  gym.
By the end o f that year I tur ned sixteen and my grandfather
bought me a used, doo - doo  br o wn Chevy Citation. On e of the
ﬁrst mor ning s I ever dr ove it to school, someone spray
painted the wor d “ nigger ”  on my driver’s side door . This time
they spelled it cor r ectly and P rincipal F r eeman was again at a
loss fo r wor d s. The fury th at chur ned within me that day was
indescribable, but it didn ’t radiate out. It br ok e me down
fr om within because I had n’t yet lear ned what to do or wher e
to channel that much  emotion.
W as I supposed to ﬁght ev erybody? I’d been suspended fr om
school thr ee  times for ﬁghting, and by now I w as almost
numb. Instead, I withdr ew and fell into the well of black
nationalism. Malcolm X be came my pr ophet of choice. I used
to c ome home fr om schoo l and watch the same video of one
of h is early speeches every damn day . I was tryi ng to ﬁnd
comfort somewher e, and the way he analyzed history and
spun black hopelessness into rage nourished m e, though
most of his political and economic philosophies went over my
head. It was his anger at a system made by and for white
people that I connected with because I lived in a haze of
hate, t rapped in my own fruitless rage and ignorance. But I
wasn’t Nation  of Islam material. That shit took discipline, and
I had none of  that.
Instead, by my junior ye ar, I went out of my way to piss
people oﬀ by becoming the e xact ster eotype racist white
people loathe d and fear ed. I wor e my pants down below my
ass every day . I ghetto  wir ed my car ster eo to house
speak ers wh ich ﬁlled the trunk of my Citation. I rattled
windows when I cruised down Brazil’s main drag blasting
Snoop’s Gin and Juice . I put thr ee of those shag carpet
covers over my steering wheel and dangled a pa ir of fuzzydice fr o m the r earview . Every mor ning befor e scho ol I star ed
into our bathr oom mir r or a nd came up with new ways to fuck
with the racists at my  school.
I e ven conco cted wild hair dos. Once, I gave myself a r everse
part—shaving away all m y hair save a thin radial line on the
lef t side of my scalp. It wasn’t that I was unpopular . I was
consider ed the cool blac k kid in town, but if you’d have
bother ed to drill down a little deeper, you’d see tha t I wasn’t
about black cultur e and t hat my antics wer en’t r eally trying
to call out racism. I wasn’t about anything at  all.
Everything I did was to get a r eaction out of the p eople who
hated me most because everyone’s opinion of me matter ed
to me, and th at’s a shallow way to live. I was full of pain, had
no r eal purpose, and if you wer e watching fr om afar it would
have lo ok ed lik e I’d given up on any chance of success. That
I was heading for disaster . But I hadn’t let go of all hope. I
had one mor e dr eam  lef t.
I wanted to join the Air  F or ce.
My grandfath er had been a cook in the Air F or ce for thirty -
seven  ye ars, and h e was so pr oud of his service that e ven
af ter he r etir ed he’d we ar his dr ess unifor m to chur ch on
Sundays, and  his work - a - day  unifor m midweek just to sit on
the damn por ch. That lev el of pride inspir ed me to join the
Civil Ai r P atr o l, the civilian auxiliary of the Air F or ce. W e met
once a week, mar ched in for mation, and lear ned about the
various jobs available in t he Air F or ce fr om oﬃcers, which is
how I became fascinated with P arar escue—the guys who
jump o ut of airplanes to pull downed pilots out of har m’s
way .
I at tended a week - long  cou rse during the summe r befor e my
fr eshman yea r called PJOC, the P arar escue Jump O rientation
Course. As usual, I was the only . One day a parar escumannamed Scott Gear en c ame to speak, and he had a
motherfuck er of a story to tell. During a standar d e x er cise,
on a high alt itude jump fr om 13,000 feet, Gear en  deployed
his chute with another sk y diver right above him. That wasn’t
out of the o r dinary . He had the right of way, and per his
training, he’d waved oﬀ the other jumper . Ex cept the guy
didn’t see him, which placed Gear en in grave danger
because the jumper above him was still mid fr ee - fall , hurtling
thr ough the air at over 120 mph. He went into a c annonball
hoping to avoid clipping Gear en, but it didn’t work. Gear en
had no clue what was coming when his teammate ﬂew
thr ough his canopy, collapsing it on contact, and slammed
into Gear en’s face with his knees. Gear en was knock ed
unconscious instantly and wobbled into another fr ee fall, his
crushed chute cr eating very little drag. The other sk ydiver
was able to deploy his chute and survive with minor  injuries.
Gear en didn’t r eally land.  He bounced lik e a ﬂat bask etball,
thr ee times, but because he’d been unconscious, his body
was limp, and he didn’t co me apart despite crashin g into the
gr ound at 100 mph. He died twice on the operating table,
but the  ER docs br ought h im back to life. When he wok e in a
hospital bed, they said he wouldn’t mak e a full r ecovery and
would never be a parar escuman again. Eighteen months
later he’d deﬁed medical odds, made that full r ecovery, and
was back on the job he  loved.Scott Gear en af ter his accident
F or years I was obsess ed with that story because he’d
survived the impossible, and I r esonated with his survival.
A f ter W ilmoth’s mur der, with all those racist taunts raining
down on my head (I w on’t bor e you with every single
episode, just know ther e wer e many mor e), I felt lik e I was
fr ee falling with no fucki ng chute. Gear en was living pr oof
that it’ s poss ible to transcend anything that doesn ’t kill you,
and fr om the time I hear d  him speak I knew I would enlist in
the Air F or ce af ter gradua tion, which only made school seem
mor e  ir r elevant.
Especially af ter I was cut fr om the varsity bask etball team
during my junior year . I wasn’t cut because of my skills. Thecoaches knew  I was one of the best players they had, and
that I loved the game. Johnny and I played it night and day .
Our entir e friendship was based on bask etball, but because I
was angry at the coaches for how they used me on the JV
team the year befor e, I d idn’t attend summer work outs, and
they took that as a lack of commitment to the te am. They
didn’t know or car e that when they cut me, they’d eliminated
any incentive I’d had to k eep my GP A up, which I’d bar ely
managed to do thr ough cheating anyway . Now, I had no good
r eason to attend school. A t least that’s what I thought,
because I was clueless ab out the emphasis that the military
places on education. I ﬁgur ed they’d tak e anybody . T wo
incidents convinced me otherwise and inspir ed me to
change.
The ﬁrst was when I failed the Ar med Services V ocational
Aptitude Battery test (ASV AB) during my junior year . The
ASV AB is the ar med fo r ces version of the S A T s. It’s a
standar dized test that allows the military to assess your
cur r ent knowledge and futur e potential for lear ning at the
same time, and I showed up for that test pr epa r ed to do
what I  did best: cheat. I ’d been copying on every test, in
every c lass, f or years, but when I took my seat for t he ASV AB
I wa s s hock ed to see that the people seated to my right and
lef t had diﬀer ent tests than I did. I had to go it alone and
scor ed a 20 out of a possible 99 points. The  absolute
minimum sta ndar d to be a dmitted to the Air F or ce is only 36,
and I couldn’t even get  ther e.
The se cond sign that I needed to change ar rived with a
postmark jus t befor e school let out for the summer af ter
junior year . My mother w as still in her emotional black hole
af ter W ilmoth’s mur der, and her coping mechanism was to
tak e on as much as possible. She work ed full - time  at DeP auw
University and taught night classes at Indiana State
University because if she stopped hustling long enough tothink, she would r ealize the r eality of her life. S he k ept it
moving, was  never ar ound, and never ask ed to see my
grades. A f te r the ﬁrst semester of our junior year, I
r emember Jo hnny and me bringing home Fs and Ds. W e
spent two hours doctoring  the ink. W e tur ned Fs into Bs and
Ds into Cs, and wer e l aughing the whole dam n time. I
actually r emember feeling a perverse pride in bein g able to
show my fak e grades to  my mother, but she ne ver even
ask ed to see them. She took my damn wor d for  it.
Junior year transcript
W e lived parallel lives in  the same house, and since I was
mor e or less raising myse lf, I stopped listening to h er . In fact,
about ten days befor e the letter ar rived, she’d kick ed me out
because I r efused to com e home fr om a party befo r e curfew .
She told me that if I didn’t, I shouldn’t come home at  all.
In m y mind, I had alr ead y been living by myself f or several
years. I made my own meals, cleaned my own clothes. I
wasn’t angry  at her . I was cock y and ﬁgur ed I didn’t need her
anymor e. I stayed out tha t night, and for the ne xt week and
a half I cras hed at Johnny’s place or with other friends.
Eventually the day came when I’d spent my last dollar . By
chance, she called me at Johnny’s that mor ning and told me
about a letter fr om schoo l. It said I’d missed over  a quarterof the  year due to une x cused absences, that I had a D
average, and unless I showed signiﬁcant impr ovement in my
GP A a nd attendance during my senior year, I would not
graduate. She wasn’t emotional about it. She was mor e
e xhausted than  e xasperated.
“I’ll come home and get the note,” I  said.
“No need for that,” she r eplied, “I just wanted you to know
you wer e ﬂunking  out.”
I sh owed up on her doors tep later that day with my stomach
gr owling. I didn’t ask for for giveness and she didn’t demand
an apology . She just lef t the door open and walk e d away . I
stepped into  the kitchen and made myself a peanut butter
and jelly sandwich. She passed me the letter without saying
a wor d . I r ead it in my r oom wher e the walls wer e paper ed
over w ith lay ers of Michael Jor dan and special ops posters.
Inspiration for twin passions slipping thr ough my  ﬁngers.
That n ight, af ter taking a shower, I wiped the steam away
fr om our cor r oded bathr o om mir r or and took a go od look. I
didn’t lik e who I saw star ing back. I was a low - budget  thug
with no  purpo se and no fu tur e. I felt so disgusted I wanted to
punch that motherfuck er in the face and shatter glass.
Instead, I lectur ed him. It was time to get  r eal.
“ L ook at you,” I said. “Why do you think the Air F o r ce wants
your punk ass? Y ou stand for nothing. Y ou  ar e an
embar rassment.”
I r eached for the shaving cr eam, smoothed a thin coat over
my face, unwrapped a fr esh razor and k ept ta lking as I
shaved.
“Y ou ar e one dumb motherfuck er . Y ou r ead lik e a thir d
grader . Y ou’r e a fucking  jok e! Y ou’ve never tried har d atanything in your life besid es bask etball, and you have goals?
That’s fucking  hilarious.”
A f ter s having peach fuzz fr om my cheeks and chin, I lather ed
up my scalp. I was desperate for a change. I wanted to
become someone  new .
“Y ou don’t see people in t he military sagging their pants. Y ou
need to stop talking lik e a wanna - be - gangster . N one  of this
shit is gonna  cut it! No mor e taking the easy wa y out! It’s
time to gr ow the fuck  up!”
Steam billow ed all ar ound me. It rippled oﬀ my skin and
pour ed fr om my soul. What started as a spontaneous venting
session had become a solo  intervention.
“It’s on you,” I said. “Y ea h, I know shit is fuck ed up. I know
what you’ve been thr oug h. I was ther e, bitch! Mer ry fucking
Christmas. Nobody is coming to save your ass! Not your
mommy, not W ilmoth. Nobody! It’s up to  you!”
By the time I was done talking, I was shaved cle an. W ater
pearled on my scalp, str eamed fr om my for ehead, and
dripped down the bridge of my nose. I look ed diﬀer ent, and
for the  ﬁrst time, I’d held  myself accountable. A new ritual
was bo r n, one that stayed with me for years. It would help
me get  my grades up, whip my sor ry ass into shape, and see
me thr ough graduation and into the Air  F or ce.
The ritual was simple. I’ d shave my face and sc alp every
night, get loud, and get r eal. I set goals, wr ote them on P ost -
It  n otes, and tagged t hem to what I now call the
A ccountability Mir r or, because each day I’d hold myself
accountable to the goals I’d set. A t ﬁrst my goal s involved
shaping up my appearance and accomplishing all my chor es
without having to be  ask ed.Make your bed like you’re in the military every  day!
Pull up your  pants!
Shave your head every  morning!
Cut the  grass!
W ash all  dishes!
The A c countability Mir r or k ept me on point fr om the n on, and
though I was still young when this strategy came thr ough
me, since then I’ve found it useful for people at any stage in
life. Y ou could be on the cusp of r etir ement, looking to
r einvent yourself . Maybe you’r e going thr ough a bad br eak -
up  or  have gained weight. P er haps you’r e per m anently
disabled, over coming some other injury, or ar e just coming
to grips with how much of your life you’ve wasted, living
without purpose. In each case, that negativity you’r e feeling
is your  inter nal desir e for change, but change doesn’t come
easy, a nd the r eason this ritual work ed so well fo r me was
because of my  tone.
I wasn ’t ﬂuﬀ y . I was raw because that was the on ly way to
get my self rig ht. That summer between my junior and senior
year in  high school I was afraid. I was insecur e. I wasn’t a
smart kid. I’d blown oﬀ all accountability for my entir e
teenage e xistence, and actually thought I was getting over
on all the adults in my li fe, getting over on the s ystem. I’d
duped myself into a negative feedback loop of cheating and
scamming that on the surface look ed lik e advancement until
I hit a brick fucking wall called r eality . That night when I
came h ome and r ead the letter fr om my school, the r e was no
denying the truth, and I deliver ed it  har d.
I didn’ t dance ar ound and say, “ Geez, David, you ar e not
taking your education very seriously .” No, I had to own it inthe raw  beca use the only way we can change is to be r eal
with ou rselves. If you don’t know shit and have never tak en
school seriou sly, then say, “I’m dumb!” T ell yourself that you
need to get y our ass to w ork because you’r e falling  behind in
life!
If you look in  the mir r or and you see a fat person, don’t tell
yourself that  you need to  lose a couple of pound s. T ell the
truth. Y ou’r e fucking fat! I t’s ok ay . Just say you’r e fa t if you’r e
fat. Th e dirty  mir r or that you see every day is going to tell
you th e truth every time, so why ar e you still lying to
yourself? So you can feel  better for a few minutes and stay
the fucking same? If you’r e fat you need to change the fact
that yo u’r e fat because it’s very fucking unhealth y . I know
because I’ve been  ther e.
If y ou have work ed for thirty years doing the same shit
you’ve hated  day in and day out because you wer e afraid to
quit and tak e a risk, you’ve been living lik e a pussy . P eriod,
point blank. T ell yourself the truth! That you’ve wasted
enough time, and that you have other dr eams that will tak e
courage to r ealize, so you don’t die a fucking  pussy .
Call yourself  out!
Nobody lik es to hear the har d truth. Individually and as a
cultur e, we avoid what we need to hear most. This world is
fuck ed up, ther e ar e major pr oblems in our society . W e ar e
still div iding ourselves up along racial and cultural lines, and
people don’t have the balls to hear it! The truth  is racism
and bi gotry still fucking e xist and some people ar e so thin -
skinned  t he y r efuse to admit that . T o this day, many in Brazil
claim t hat th er e is no raci sm in their small town. Th at’s why I
have t o give Kirk F r eeman pr ops. When I called him in the
spring of 2018, he r emember ed what I went thr ough very
clearly . He’s one of the few who isn’t afraid of the  truth.But if you ar e the only , and you ar en’t stuck in some r eal -
world  g enocidal twilight zone, y ou’d better get r eal too . Y our
life is not fu ck ed up because of overt racists or hidden
systemic racism. Y ou ar en’t missing out on opp ortunities,
making shit money, and getting evicted because of America
or Donald fucking T rump or because your ancestors wer e
slaves or because some people hate immigrants or Jews or
harass women or believe gay people ar e going to h ell. If any
of that shit is stopping you fr om e x celling in life, I’ve got
some news. Y ou are stopping  you!
Y ou ar e  givin g up instead of getting har d! T ell the truth about
the r ea l r easons for your limitations and you will tur n that
negativity, which is r eal,  into jet fuel. Those odds stack ed
against you will become a damn  runway!
Ther e is no mor e time to  waste. Hours and days evaporate
lik e cr e eks in  the desert. That’s why it’s ok ay to be cruel to
yourself as long as you r ealize you’r e doing it to become
better . W e all need thick er skin to impr ove in life. Being sof t
when you look in the mir r or isn’t going to inspir e the
wholesale ch anges we need to shif t our pr esent and open up
our  futur e.
The mor ning af ter that ﬁrst session with the A ccountability
Mir r or, I trashed the shag steering wheel and the fu zzy dice. I
tuck ed my shirt in and wor e my pants with a belt, and, once
school started up again, I stopped eating at my lunch table.
F or the ﬁrst time, being lik ed and acting cool wer e a waste of
my tim e, and instead of eating with all the popu lar kids, I
found my own table and ate  alone.
Mind y ou, the  r est of my pr ogr ess could not be de scribed as
a blink - and - you ’ ll - miss - it  metamorphosis. Lady L u ck did not
suddenly show up, run me a hot soapy bath, and kiss me lik e
she loved me. In fact, the only r eason I didn’t become justanother stati stic is because, at the last possible m oment, I
got to  work.
During my senior year in high school, all I car ed about was
working out, playing bask etball, and studying, and it was the
A ccountability Mir r or that k ept me motivated to k eep pushing
towar d something better . I wok e up befor e dawn and started
going t o the YMCA most mor nings at 5 a.m. befor e  school to
hit the  weights. I ran all the damn time, usually a r ound the
local golf course af ter dark. One night I ran thirteen miles—
the most I’d ever run in my entir e life. On that run I came to
a fami liar intersection. It was the same str eet wher e that
r edneck had  pulled a gu n on me. I avoided it and ran on,
covering a half mile in the opposite dir ection befor e
something told me to tur n back. When I ar rived at that
intersection a second time, I stopped and contemp lated it. I
was scar ed shitless of tha t str eet, my heart was lea ping fr om
my chest, which is e xact ly why I suddenly started char ging
down its fucking  thr oat.
W ithin seconds, two snarling dogs got loose and chased me
as t he woods leaned in on  both sides. It was all I c ould do to
stay a step a head of the beasts. I k ept e xpecting that truck
to r eap pear a nd run me th e fuck down, lik e some scene fr om
Mississippi cir ca 1965, bu t I k ept running, faster and faster,
until I was br eathless. Eventually the hounds of Hell gave up
and lop ed oﬀ , and it was  just me, the r hythm and  steam of
my br e ath, and that deep country quiet. It was cleansing. By
the time I t ur ned back, my fear was gone. I ow ned that
fucking  str eet.
F r om then on, I brainwashed myself into craving discomfort.
If it was raining, I would go run. Whenever it started snowing,
my mind would say, Get your fucking runnin g shoes on .
Sometimes I  wussed out and had to deal with it at the
A ccountability Mir r or . But facing that mir r or, facing myself,motivated me to ﬁght thr ough uncomfortable e xperiences,
and, a s a r esult, I becam e tougher . And being tough and
r esilient helped me meet my  goals.
Nothing was as har d for me as lear ning. The kitchen table
became my all - day , all - night  study hall. A f ter I’d failed the
ASV AB a second time, my mother r ealized that I was serious
about the Air F or ce, so she found me a tutor who h elped me
ﬁgur e out a system I could use to lear n. That system was
memorization. I couldn’t lear n just by scratching a few notes
and m emorizing those. I had to r ead a te xt book and write
each p age do wn in my no tebook. Then do it again a second
and thir d time. That’s how knowledge stuck to the mir r or of
my mind. Not thr ough lear ning, but thr ough tra nscription,
memorization, and  r ecall.
I did that for  English. I did that for history . I wr ote out and
memorized fo r mulas for algebra. If my tutor took an hour to
teach m e a lesson, I had to go back over my notes  fr om that
session for six hours to lock it in. My personal study hall
schedule and goals became P ost - It  n otes on my
A ccountability Mir r or, and guess what happened? I
developed an obsession for  lear ning.
Over six months I went f r om having a fourth grade r eading
level to that of a senior in high school. My vocabulary
mushr oomed. I wr ote out  thousands of ﬂash car ds and went
over th em for hours, days, and weeks. I did the same for
mathematical for mulas. P art of it was survival instinct. I
damn sur e wasn’t going to get into college based on
academics, and though I was a starter on the varsity
bask etball team my senior year, no college scouts  knew my
name. All I kn ew was that I had to get the fuck ou t of Brazil,
Indiana; that the military was my best chance; and to get
ther e I had to pass the ASV AB. On my thir d try, I met the
minimum standar d for the Air  F or ce.Living with purpose changed everything for me—at least in
the short ter m. During my senior year in high school,
studying and working out gave my mind so much ener gy
that ha te ﬂak ed fr om my soul lik e used - up  snak e skin. The
r esentment I held towar d  the racists in Brazil, the emotion
that had dominated me and was bur ning me up inside,
dissipated because I’d ﬁnally consider ed the fucking  sour ce.
I look ed at the people who wer e making me feel
uncomfortable and r ealized how uncomfortable they wer e in
their o wn skin. T o mak e fun of or try to intimidate someone
they didn’t even know b ased on race alone was a clear
indication that something was very wr ong with them, not
me. But when you have no conﬁdence it become s easy to
value other people’s opinions, and I was valuing everyone’s
opinion witho ut considerin g the minds that generated them.
That so unds silly, but it’s an easy trap to fall into, especially
when you ar e insecur e on top of being the only . As soon as I
made that connection, being upset with them was not worth
my tim e. Bec ause if I was gonna kick their ass in life, and I
was, I had way too much shit to do . Each insult or dismissive
gestur e became mor e fuel for the engine r evving inside  me.
By the  time I graduated, I knew that the conﬁdence I’d
managed to develop did n’t come fr om a perfect family or
God - given  t al ent. It came fr om pers onal accountability which
br ought me self r espect, and self r espect will always light a
way  forwar d.
F or me , it lit up a path s traight out of Brazil, for ever . But I
didn’t get away clean. W hen you transcend a place in time
that ha s challenged you to the cor e, it can feel lik e you’ve
won a war . Don’t fall for that mirage. Y our past, you r deepest
fears, have a way of going dor mant befor e springing back to
life at double  str ength. Y ou must r emain vigilant. F or me, theAir F or ce r evealed that I was still sof t inside. I  was still
insecur e.
I wasn’t yet har d of bone and  mind.C H A L L E N G E  # 2
It’s time to c ome eyeball to eyeball with yourself , and get
raw and r eal. This is not a self - love  tactic. Y ou can’t ﬂuﬀ it.
Don’t massa ge your ego . This is about abolishing the ego
and taking the ﬁrst step towar d becoming the r eal  you!
I tack ed P ost - It  notes  on my A ccountability Mir r or, and I’ll
ask you to do  the same. D igital devices won’t work . W rite all
your in securities, dr eams, and goals on P ost - Its  a nd tag up
your mir r or . If you need mor e education, r emind yourself
that you need to start w orking your ass oﬀ because you
ar en’t smart enough! P er iod, point blank. If you look in the
mir r or and see someone who is obviously overweight, that
means you’r e  fucking fat! Own it! It’s ok ay to be unkind with
yourself in these moment s because we need thick er skin to
impr ove in  life.
Whether it’s a car eer goa l (quit my job, start a business), a
lifestyle goal  (lose weight, get mor e active), or a n athletic
one (run my ﬁrst 5K, 10 K, or marathon), you need to be
truthful with yourself about wher e you ar e and the
necessary steps it will tak e to achieve those goals, day by
day . Each step, each necessary point of self - impr ovement ,
should be written as its own note. That means you  have to
do som e r esear ch and br eak it all down. F or e xamp le, if you
ar e trying to lose forty pounds, your ﬁrst P ost - It  may be to
lose two pounds in the  ﬁrst week. Once that goal is
achieved, r em ove the note and post the ne xt goal of two to
ﬁve pounds until your ultimate goal is  r ealized.
Whatever your goal, you’ll need to hold yourself
accountable for the small  steps it will tak e to get ther e. Self -impr ovement  tak es dedication and self - discipline . The dirty
mir r or you see every day is going to r eveal the truth. Stop
ignoring it. Use it to your advantage. If you feel it, post an
image of yourself staring into your tagged - up  A ccountability
Mir r or on social media with the hashtags #canthurtme
#accountabilitymir r or .C H A P T E R  T H R E E
3 .  THE IMPOSSIBLE T ASK
I T  W AS  P AST  MIDNIGHT  AND  THE  STREETS  WERE  DEAD . I STEERED  MY  PICK UP
truck in to another empty parking lot and killed the engine. In
the qu iet all I could hear wer e the eerie halogen hum of the
str eet lamps and the scratch of my pen as I check ed oﬀ
another franchise feed tr ough. The latest in a never -ending
series of fast food and dine-in industrial kitchens that
r eceived mor e nightly visitors than you’d car e to know about.
That’s why guys lik e me showed up to places lik e this in the
wee hours. I stuﬀed my clipboar d under the ar mr est,
grabbed my gear, and began r estocking rat  traps.
They’r e ever ywher e, thos e little gr een bo x es. L ook ar ound
almost any r estaurant and you’ll ﬁnd them, hidden in plain
sight. M y job was to bait, move, or r eplace them. S ometimes
I hit  pa y dirt and found a rat car cass, which never c aught me
by surprise. Y ou know death when you smell  it.
This w asn’t t he mission I signed up for when I enlisted in the
Air F or ce with dr eams of j oining a P arar escue unit. Back then
I w as nineteen years old  and weighed 175 pounds. By the
time I was d ischar ged four years later, I had ballooned to
nearly 300 pounds and was on a diﬀer ent kind of patr ol. A t
that w eight, even bending  down to bait the traps took eﬀort.
I was so damn fat I had  to sew an athletic soc k into the
cr otch of my work pan ts so they wouldn’t split when I
dr opped to one knee. No bullshit. I was a sor ry fucking  sight.W ith the e xterior handle d, it was time to ventur e indoors,
which was its own wilder ness. I had k eys to almost every
r estaurant in this part of Indianapolis, and their alar m codes
too . Once inside, I pumped my hand - held  s ilver canist er full
of poison and placed a fumigation mask over my face. I
look ed lik e a damn space alien in that thing, wit h its dual
ﬁlters jutting out fr om my mouth, pr otecting me fr om to xic
fumes.
P r otecting  me.
If ther e was anything I lik ed about that job it was the stealth
natur e of working late, moving in and out of ink y shadows. I
loved that mask for the same r eason. It was vital, and not
because of any damn insecticide. I needed it because it
made it impossible for a nyone to see me, especially me.
Even i f by chance I caught my own r eﬂection i n a glass
doorway or on a stainles s steel countertop, it wasn’t me I
was seeing. It was some jank y - ass , low - budget  stor m tr ooper .
The kin d of guy who woul d palm yester day’s br ownies on his
way out the  door .
It wasn’t  me.
Sometimes I’d see r oaches scur ry for cover when  I ﬂipped
the lights on to spray dow n the counters and the tiled ﬂoors.
I’d see  dead r odents stuck  to stick y traps I’d laid on pr evious
visits. I bagged and dumped them. I check ed the lighting
systems I’d installed to catch moths and ﬂies and cleaned
those o ut too . W ithin a half hour I was gone, r olling on to the
ne xt r estaura nt. I had a dozen stops every night a nd had to
hit them all befor e  dawn.
Maybe this kind of gig sounds disgusting to you. When I think
back I’m disgusted too, b ut not because of the j ob. It was
honest work.  Necessary . Hell, in Air F or ce boot cam p I got on
the wr ong side of my ﬁrs t drill ser geant and she made methe latrine queen. It was my job to k eep the latrines in our
bar racks shin ing. She told me that if she found one speck of
dirt in that la trine at any moment I would get r ecycled back
to day  one and join a ne w ﬂight. I took my discipline. I was
happy just to be in the Air  F or ce, and I cleaned the hell out of
that la trine. Y ou could have eaten oﬀ that ﬂoor . F our years
later, t he guy who was s o ener gized by opportunity that he
was e x cited to clean lat rines was gone and I d idn’t feel
anything at  all.
They say ther e’s always light at the end of the t unnel, but
not once your eyes adjust to the darkness, and that’s what
happened to  me. I was numb. Numb to my life, miserable in
my mar riage , and I’d accepted that r eality . I was a  would - be
war rior tur ned cockr oach sniper on the graveyar d shif t. Just
another zombie selling his time on earth, going thr ough the
motions. In fact, the only  insight I had into my job at that
time was that it was actually a step  up.
When I was ﬁrst dischar g ed fr om the military I go t a job at
St. V incent’s  Hospital. I work ed security fr om 11 p.m. to 7
a.m. for minimum wage and clear ed about $700 a month.
Every now and then I’d see an Ecolab truck pull up. W e wer e
on the e xter minator’s r eg ular r otation, and it was my job to
unlock the hospital kitch en for him. One night we got to
talking, and he mentioned that Ecolab was hiring, and that
the job  came  with a fr ee truck and no boss looking  over your
shoulder . It was also a 3 5 per cent pay raise. I didn’t think
about the health risks. I didn’t think at all. I was ta king what
was be ing oﬀer ed. I was on that spoon - fed  pa th of least
r esistance, le tting dominoes fall on my head, and it was
killing me slowly . But ther e’s a diﬀer ence between being
numb and clueless. In the dark night ther e wer en’t a lot of
distractions to get me out of my head, and I knew that I had
tipped the ﬁrst domino . I’d started the chain r ea ction that
put me on Ecolab  duty .The Air F or ce should hav e been my way out. That ﬁrst drill
ser geant did end up r ecycling me into a diﬀer ent u nit, and in
my new ﬂight I became  a star r ecruit. I was 6’2” and
weighed abo ut 175 pounds. I was fast and str ong, our unit
was the best ﬂight in all of boot camp, and soon I was
training for my dr eam job: Air F or ce P arar escue.  W e wer e
guar dian ang els with fangs, trained to dr op fr om the sk y
behind enem y lines and pull downed pilots out of har m’s
way . I was one of the best guys in that training. I w as one of
the be st at push - ups , an d the be st at sit - ups , ﬂutter kicks,
and running.  I was one point behind honor grad, but ther e
was something they didn’t talk about in the lead - up  to
P arar escue t raining: wate r conﬁdence. That’s a nice name
for a course wher e they try to dr own your ass for weeks, and
I was uncomfortable as hell in the  water .
Although my mom got us oﬀ the public dole a nd out of
subsidized housing within thr ee years, she still didn’t have
e xtra cash for swim lessons, and we avoided pools. It wasn’t
until I attended Boy Scout camp when I was twelve  years old
that I was ﬁnally confr onted with swimming. L eaving Buﬀalo
allowed me to join the Scouts, and camp was  my best
opportunity to scor e all the merit badges I’d need to stay on
the pa th to becoming an Eagle Scout. One mor ning it was
time to qualif y for the swimming merit badge and that meant
a one - mile  swim in a lak e course, mark ed oﬀ with buoys. All
the oth er kid s jumped in and started getting af ter it, and if I
wanted to save face I had to pr etend I knew what I was
doing, so I followed them into the lak e. I dog paddled the
best I could, but k ept swa llowing water so I ﬂipped onto my
back and ended up swim ming the entir e mile with a fuck ed -
up  backstr ok e I’d impr ovised on the ﬂy . Merit badge  secur ed.Boy Scouts
When it came time to tak e the swim test to get into
P arar escue, I  needed to b e able to swim for r eal. This was a
timed, 500- meter  f r eest yle swi m, and even at nineteen years
old I didn’t know how to s wim fr eestyle. So I took m y stunted
ass down to Bar nes & Noble, bought Swimming for
Dummies , studied the diagrams, and practiced in the pool
every day . I hated putti ng my face in the water, but I’d
manage for one str ok e, then two, and befor e lon g I could
swim an entir e  lap.
I wa sn’t as buoyant as m ost swimmers. Whenever I stopped
swimming, even for a moment, I’d start to sink, which made
my he art po und with panic, and my incr eased tension just
made it worse. Eventually , I passed that swim test,  but ther e
is a diﬀer ence between being competent and comfortable in
the water, another big gap fr om comfortable to conﬁdent,and wh en yo u can’t ﬂoat lik e most people, water c onﬁdence
does not come easy . Sometimes it doesn’t come at  all.
In P arar escue training, w ater conﬁdence is part of the ten -
week  pr ogram, and it’s ﬁlled with speciﬁc evolutions
designed to test how well we perfor m in the water under
str ess. One of the worst evolutions for me was called
Bobbing. The class was divided into gr oups of ﬁve, lined up
fr om gutter to gutter in th e shallow end, and fully kitted up.
Our backs wer e strapped with twin eighty - liter  tanks made
fr om galvani zed steel, and we wor e sixteen - pound  weight
belts t oo . W e wer e loaded the fuck down, which would have
been ﬁne, e x cept in this evolution we wer en’t allowed to
br eathe fr om  those tanks. Instead, we wer e told to walk
backwar d down the slop e of the pool fr om the thr ee - foot
section to the deep end,  about ten feet down, and on that
slow w alk into position, my mind swirled with doubt and
negativity .
What the fuck are you doing here?  This isn’t for you!  Y ou
can’t swim! Y ou’re an imposter and they will ﬁnd you  out!
T ime slowed down and those seconds seemed lik e minutes.
My diaphrag m lur ched, trying to for ce air into my lungs.
Theor etically, I knew that r elaxation was the k ey to all the
underwater evolutions, but I was too ter riﬁed to let go . My
jaw clenched  as tight as my ﬁsts. My head thr obbed as I
work ed to stave oﬀ panic.  F inally, we wer e all in position and
it w as time to  start bobbing. That meant pushing u p fr om the
bottom to the surface (without the beneﬁt of ﬁnning), getting
a gulp of air,  and sinking back down. It wasn’t easy, getting
up fully loaded, but at least I was able to br eathe, and that
ﬁrst br eath was a salvation. Oxygen ﬂooded my system and I
started to r elax until the instructor yelled “Switch!”  That was
our cue to t ak e our ﬁns fr om our feet, place them on our
hands, and use one pull with our ar ms to pr opel ourselves tothe surface. W e wer e all owed to push oﬀ the ﬂoor of the
pool, but we couldn’t kick. W e did that for ﬁve  minutes.
Shallow water and surface black outs ar en’t uncommon
during water conﬁdence training. It goes along with str essing
the body and limiting o xy gen intak e. W ith the ﬂippers on my
hands I’d bar ely get my face high enough out of the water to
br eathe, and in between  I was working har d and bur ning
o xygen. And when you bur n too much too fast, your brain
shuts d own and you will black the fuck out. Our instructors
called that, “meeting the wizar d.” As the clock tick e d, I could
see stars materializing in  my peripheral vision and felt the
wizar d cr eeping  close.
I p asse d that evolution, and soon, ﬁnning with my ar ms or
feet be came easy for me. What stayed har d fr om beginning
to end  was one of our simplest tasks: tr eading wat er without
our hands. W e had to k e ep our hands and our c hins high
above the water, using o nly our legs, which we’d swirl in a
blender - lik e  motion, for thr ee minut es. That doesn’t sound
lik e much time, and for m ost of the class it was easy . F or me,
it was damn near impossible. My chin k ept hitting the water,
which meant  the time would start again fr om triple zer o . All
ar ound me, my classmates wer e so comfortable their legs
wer e b ar ely m oving, whil e mine wer e whir ring at t op speed,
and I still couldn’t get half as high as those white boys who
look ed to be def ying  gravity .
Every day it was another humiliation in the pool. Not that I
was embar rassed publicly . I passed all the evolutions, but
inside I was suﬀering. Each night, I’d ﬁxate on the ne xt day’s
task and become so ter ri ﬁed I couldn’t sleep, and soon my
fear morphed into r esentment towar d my classmates who, in
my mind, had it easy, which dr edged up my  past.
I was the only  black man in my unit, which r eminded me of
my childhoo d in rural In diana, and the har der the waterconﬁdence training became, the higher those dark waters
would rise until it seemed  I was also being dr owned fr om the
inside out. While the r est of my class was sleeping, that
potent cockta il of fear and rage thrummed thr ough my veins
and my noctur nal ﬁxations became their own kind of self -
fulﬁlling  p r ophecy . One wher e fail ur e was inevitable because
my uncheck ed fear was  unleashing something I couldn’t
contr ol: the quitting  mind.
It all came to a head six weeks into training with the “buddy
br eathing” e x er cise. W e partner ed up, each pair gripped one
another by the for ear m, and took tur ns br eathing thr ough
just one snork el. Meanwhile, the instructors thrashed us,
trying to separate us fr om our snork el. All of this was
supposed to be happening at or near the surface, but I was
negatively buoyant, which meant I was sinking into the
middle water s of the deep end, dragging my partner down
with m e. He’d tak e a br e ath and pass the snork el down to
me. I’d  swim to the surface, e xhale and attempt to  clear the
water f r om our snork el and get a clean br eath befor e passing
it back to him, but the instructors made th at almost
impossible. I’d usually only clear the tube half way, and
inhale mor e water than air . F r om the jump, I was operating
fr om a n o xy gen deﬁcit while ﬁghting to stay near the
surface.
In military training, it’s the instructors’ job to identif y weak
links and challenge them  to perfor m or quit, and they could
tell I was struggling. In the pool that day, one of them was
always in my face, yelling and thrashing me, while I chok ed,
trying and failing to gulp air thr ough a nar r ow tub e to stave
oﬀ the  wizar d. I went under and r emember looking up at the
r est of  the class, splayed out lik e ser ene starﬁsh on the
surface. Calm as can be, t hey passed their snork els back and
forth with ease, while I fu med. I know now that my  instructorwas ju st doing his job, bu t back then I thought, This fucker’s
not giving me a fair  shot!
I p assed that evolution too, but I still had eleven mor e
evolutions and four mor e weeks of water conﬁdence training
to go . It mad e sense. W e would be jumping out of airplanes
over water . W e needed it. I just didn’t want to do it anymor e,
and th e ne xt  mor ning, I w as oﬀer ed a way out I hadn’t seen
coming.
W eeks earlier, we’d had  our blood drawn during a med
check, and the doctors had just discover ed I car ried the
Sickle Cell T rait. I didn’t ha ve the disease, Sickle Cell Anemia,
but I had th e trait, which was believed at the  time to
incr ease the risk of sudden, e x er cise - r elated  de ath due to
car diac ar r es t. The Air F or ce didn’t want me dr opping dead in
the mi ddle of  an evolution and pulled me out of training on a
medical. I pr etended to tak e the news har d, as if my dr eam
was being ripped away . I made a big fucking act of being
pissed oﬀ, but inside I was  ecstatic.
Later that week the doctors r eversed their decision. They
didn’t speciﬁcally say it was safe for me to continue, but
they said the trait wasn’ t yet well understood and allowed
me to decide for myself . W hen I r eported back to training the
Master Ser geant (MSgt) infor med me that I’d missed too
much time and that if I wanted to continue I would have to
start o ver fr o m day one, week one. Instead of less than four
weeks, I’d have to endur e another ten weeks of the ter r or,
rage, and insomnia that came with water  conﬁdence.
These days, that kind of thing wouldn’t even r egister on my
radar . Y ou tell me to run  longer and har der than everyone
else just to get a fair shak e, I’d say, “ R oger that,” and k eep
moving, but back then I w as still half - bak ed . Physically I was
str ong, but I was not even close to mastering my  mind.The MSgt star ed at me, awaiting my r esponse. I couldn’t
even look him in the ey e when I said, “Y ou kn ow what,
Master Ser geant, the doctor doesn’t know much about this
Sickle Cell thing, and it’s bothering  me.”
He nodded, emotionless, and signed the papers pulling me
out of the p r ogram for good. He cited Sickle Cell, and on
paper I didn’t quit, but I k new the truth. If I had been the guy
I a m today, I wouldn’t hav e given two fucks about S ickle Cell.
I sti ll h ave the Sickle Cell T rait. Y ou don’t just get rid of it, but
back then an obstacle had appear ed, and I’d  folded.
I moved on to F ort Campbell, K entuck y, told my friends and
family that I was for ced fr om the pr ogram on a medical, and
served out my four years in the T actical Air Contr ol P arty
( T A C - P ), which works with some special operations units. I
trained to liaise between gr ound units and air support—fast
movers lik e F -15s and F -16s—behind enemy lines. It was
challenging work with intelligent people, but sadly I was
never pr oud of it and didn’t see the opportunities oﬀer ed
because I knew I was a q uitter who had let fear d ictate my
futur e.
I buried my s hame in the gym and at the kitchen table. I got
into powerlif t ing and layer ed on the mass. I ate an d work ed
out. W ork ed out and ate. In my last days in the A ir F or ce I
weighed 255 pounds. A f te r my dischar ge I continued to bulk
up wit h both muscle and fat until I weighed nearly 300
pounds. I wanted to be big because being big hid David
Goggins. I was able to tuck this 175- pound  pe rson into t hose
21- inch  bic eps and t hat ﬂabby belly . I gr ew a burly mustac he
and was intimidating to e veryone who saw me, but inside I
knew I was a pussy, and that’s a haunting  feeling.A f ter Air F or ce Boot Camp at 175 lbs in 1994290 lbs at the beach in 1999
* * *
The m or ning I began to tak e char ge of my destiny started
out lik e  any other . When the clock struck 7 a.m., my Ecolab
shif t en ded and I hit the Steak ’n Shak e drive - thru  to scor e a
lar ge c hocolate milkshak e. Ne xt stop, 7- Eleven , for a bo x of
Hostess mini chocolate doughnuts. I gobbled those on my
forty - ﬁve - minute  drive home, to a beautiful apartment on a
golf course in pr etty Car m el, Indiana, which I shar ed with my
wife, P am, and her daughter . R emember that P izza Hut
incident? I mar ried that gi rl. I mar ried a girl whose dad called
me a nigger . What does that say about  me?
W e couldn’t aﬀor d that life. P am wasn’t even working, but in
those cr edit - car d - debt - loading  days, nothing made much
sense. I was doing 70 mp h on the highway, mainlining sugar
and listening  to a local classic r ock station when Sound of
Silence  pour ed fr om the ster eo . Simon & Garfunk el’s wor ds
echoed lik e  truth.
Darkness was a friend indeed. I work ed in the dar k, hid my
true self fr om friends and strangers. Nobody would have
believed how  numb and afraid I was back then because I
look ed lik e a beast that no one would dar e fuck with, but my
mind wasn’t right, and my soul was weighed down by too
much t rauma and failur e.  I had every e x cuse in the world to
be a loser, and used them all. My life was crumbling, and
P am dealt with that by ﬂeeing the scene. Her par ents still
lived in  Brazi l, just seventy miles away . W e spent most of our
time  apart.
I ar rived home fr om work ar ound 8 a.m., and the phone rang
as soon as I walk ed in the door . It was my mother . She knew
my  r outine.“ Come on over for your staple,” she  said.
My sta ple was a br eakfast buﬀet for one, the lik es of which
few could put down in a single sitting. Think: eight P illsbury
cinnamon r ol ls, a half - dozen  scrambled eggs, a half - pound  of
bacon, and two bowls of F ruity P ebbles. Don’t for get, I had
just de cimated a bo x of donuts and a chocolate shak e. I
didn’t even have to r espond. She knew I was coming. F ood
was my drug of choice a nd I always suck ed up every last
crumb.
I hu ng up, ﬂi pped on the television, and stomped  down the
hall to the sh ower, wher e I could hear a nar rator’s voice ﬁlter
thr ough the steam. I caught snippets. “Navy SEALs…
toughest…the world.” I wrapped a towel ar ound my waist
and rushed back into the living r oom. I was so big, the towel
bar ely cover e d my fat as s, but I sat down on the c ouch and
didn’t move for thirty  minutes.
The s how followed Ba sic Underwater Demolition SEAL
(BUD/S) T raining Class 224 thr ough Hell W eek: the most
ar duous series of tasks in the most physically demanding
training in the military . I watched men sweat and suﬀer as
they tor e thr ough muddy  obstacle courses, ran on the sof t
sand holding logs over he ad, and shiver ed in icy surf . Sweat
pearled on my scalp, I wa s literally on the edge of my seat as
I s aw guys— some of the str ongest of them all—ring the bell
and quit. Made sense. Only one - thir d  o f the men who begin
BUD/S mak e it thr ough H ell W eek, and in all of my time in
P arar escue training, I couldn’t r emember feeling as awful as
these men look ed. They wer e swollen, chafe d, sleep -
deprived , and dead on their feet, and I was jealous of  them.
The lo nger I watched the mor e certain I became that ther e
wer e answer s buried in all that suﬀering. Answers that I
needed. Mor e than once the camera panned over the
endless fr oth ing ocean, and each time I felt pathetic. TheSEALs wer e everything I wasn’t. They wer e about pride,
dignity, and the type of e x cellence that came fr om bathing in
the ﬁr e, getting beat th e fuck down, and going back for
mor e, again and again. They wer e the human equivalent of
the har dest, sharpest swor d you could imagine. They sought
out the ﬂame, took the p ounding for as long as n ecessary,
longer even, until they wer e fearless and deadly . They
wer en’t motivated. They wer e driven. The show ended with
graduation. T wenty - two  pr ou d men stood shoulder to
shoulder in their dr ess w hites befor e the camera pushed in
on their Commanding  Oﬃcer .
“In a society wher e medio crity is too of ten the sta ndar d and
too of ten r ewar ded,” he said, “ther e is intense fascination
with men who detest mediocrity, who r efuse to deﬁne
themselves in conventional ter ms, and who seek to
transcend tra ditionally r ec ognized human capabilities. This is
e xactly the type of perso n BUD/S is meant to ﬁnd. The man
who ﬁn ds a way to complete each and every task to the best
of his ability . The man wh o will adapt and over come any and
all  obstacles.”
In that  moment it felt as though the Commanding Oﬃcer
was ta lking d ir ectly to me, but af ter the show ended I walk ed
back t o the bathr oom, fa ced the mir r or, and star ed myself
down. I look ed every bit of 300 pounds. I was everything all
the ha ters back home said I would be: uneducated, with no
r eal w orld skills, zer o discipline, and a dead - end  futur e.
Mediocrity w ould have been a major pr omotion. I was at the
bottom of the bar r el of life, pooling in the dr egs, but, for the
ﬁrst time in way too long, I was  awak e.
I bar ely spok e to my mother during br eakfast, and only ate
half my  stapl e because my mind was on unﬁnished business.
I’d alw ays wanted to join an elite special operations unit, and
beneath all the r olls of ﬂesh and layers of failur e, that desir ewas st ill ther e. Now it wa s coming back to life, th anks to a
chance viewi ng of a show  that continued to work on me lik e
a virus moving cell to cell, taking  over .
It b ecame an obsession I couldn’t shak e. Every mor ning af ter
work fo r almost thr ee weeks, I called active duty r ecruiters in
the Navy and told them my story . I called oﬃces all over the
country . I said I was willing  to move as long as they could get
me to SEAL training. Everyone tur ned me down. Most
wer en’t inter ested in candidates with prior service. One local
r ecruiting oﬃ ce was intrigued and wanted to meet in person,
but wh en I got ther e they  laughed in my face. I was way too
heavy, and in their eyes I was just another delusional
pr etender . I lef t that meeting feeling the same  way .
A f ter calling all the active duty r ecruiting oﬃces I could ﬁnd, I
dialed the local unit of the Naval r eserves, and spok e to P etty
Oﬃcer Steven Schaljo for the ﬁrst time. Schaljo had work ed
with multiple F -14 Sq uadr ons as an electrician and instructor
at NAS Miramar for eight years befor e joining the r ecruitment
staﬀ in San Diego, wher e the SEALs train. He work ed day and
night and r ose quickly in the ranks. His move to In dianapolis
came with a pr omotion and the challenge of ﬁnding Navy
r ecruits in the middle of the cor n. He’d only been on the job
in Indy for ten days by the time I called, and if I’ d r eached
anyone else you pr obably wouldn’t be r eading this  book. But
thr ough a combination of dumb luck and stubbor n
persistence I found one of the ﬁnest r ecruiters in th e Navy, a
guy whose favorite task was discovering diamonds in the
r ough—prior service guys lik e me who wer e look ing to r e -
enlist  and hoping to land in special  operations.
Our initial conversation didn’t last long. He said he could
help m e and  that I shoul d come in to meet in person. That
sounded fam iliar . I grabbed my k eys and dr ove straight to his
oﬃce, but didn’t get my hopes too high. By the time I ar riveda half - hour  later he was alr eady on the phone with BUD/S
administration.
Every sailor in that oﬃce—all of them white—wer e surprised
to see me e x cept Schaljo . If I was a heavyweight, Schaljo
was a lightw eight at 5’7”, but he didn’t seem faz ed by my
size, at least not at ﬁrst. He was outgoing and war m, lik e any
salesman, th ough I could tell he had some pit bull in him. He
led me  down  a hall to weigh me in, and while standing on
the scale I e yed a weight chart pinned to the wall. A t my
height, the maximum allowable weight for the Navy was 191
pounds. I held my br eath , suck ed in my gut as much as I
could, and puﬀed out my  chest in a sor ry attempt to stave
oﬀ the  humiliating moment wher e he’d let me down easy .
That moment never  came.
“Y ou’r e a big boy,” Scha ljo said, smiling and shaking his
head, as he scratched 297 pounds on a chart in his ﬁle
folder . “The Navy has a pr ogram that allows r ecruits in the
r eserves to become active duty . That’s what we’ll use for
this. It’s being phased out at the end of the year, so we need
to get you classed up befor e then. P oint is, you have some
work t o do, but you knew that.” I followed his eyes to the
weight chart and check ed it again. He nodded, smiled,
patted me on the shoulder, and lef t me to face my  truth.
I had less than thr ee months to lose 106  pounds.
It sounded lik e an impossible task, which is one r eason I
didn’t quit my job. The ot her was the ASV AB. That nightmar e
test had come back to life lik e F rank enstein’s fucking
monster . I’d passed it onc e befor e to enlist in the Air F or ce,
but to qualif y  for BUD/S I’d have to scor e much higher . F or
two weeks I studied all d ay and zapped pests each night. I
wasn’t working out yet. Serious weight loss woul d have to
wait.I took the test on a Satur day af ter noon. The following
Monday I called Schaljo . “ W elcome to the Navy,” he said. He
downloaded the good news ﬁrst. I’d done e x ceptionally well
on som e sections and was now oﬃcially a r eservist, but I’d
only scor ed a 44 on Mechanical Compr ehension. T o qualif y
for BUD /S I needed a 50. I’d have to r etak e the entir e test in
ﬁve  weeks.
These days Steven Schaljo lik es to call our chance
connection “ fate.” He sai d he could sense my drive the ﬁrst
moment we spok e, and that he believed in me fr om the
jump, which is why my weight wasn’t an issue fo r him, but
af ter that ASV AB test I w as full of doubt. So maybe what
happened lat er that night was also a for m of fate, or a much
needed dose of divine  intervention.
I’m not going to dr op the name of the r estauran t wher e it
went down because if I d id you’d never eat ther e again and
I’d have to hir e a lawyer . Just know, this place was a disaster .
I check ed the  traps outside ﬁrst and found a dead rat. Inside,
ther e wer e mor e dead r odents—a mouse and two rats—on
the stick y traps, and r oa ches in the garbage which hadn’t
been emptie d. I shook my head, got down on my knees
under the sink, and sprayed up thr ough a nar r ow gap in the
wall. I didn’t know it yet,  but I’d found their nestin g column
and when the poison hit they started to  scatter .
W ithin secon ds ther e was a skittering acr oss the back of my
neck. I brushed it oﬀ, and  craned my neck to see a stor m of
r oaches raining down to the kitchen ﬂoor fr om an open panel
in the ceiling . I’d hit the motherlode of cockr oache s and the
worst i nfestation I ever saw on the job for Ecolab. They k ept
coming. R oac hes landed on my shoulders and my head. The
ﬂoor was writhing with  them.
I le f t my can ister in the kitchen, grabbed the stick y traps,
and burst outside. I neede d fr esh air and mor e tim e to ﬁgur eout ho w I was going to clear the r estaurant of ver min. I
consider ed my options on  my way to the dumpster to trash
the r od ents, opened the lid, and found a live raccoon, hissing
mad. He bar ed his yellow teeth and lunged at me. I slammed
the dumpster  shut.
What the fuck? I mean, seriously, what the fucking fuck?
When was enough truly going to be enough? W as I willing to
let my  sor ry pr esent beco me a fuck ed - up  futur e ? How  much
longer would  I wait, how many mor e years would I bur n,
wondering if ther e was some gr eater purpose out ther e
waiting for me? I knew right then that if I didn’t mak e a stand
and sta rt walking the path of most r esistance, I wou ld end up
in this mental hell  for ever .
I di dn’t go b ack inside that r estaurant. I didn’t collect my
gear . I started my truck, stopped for a chocolate s hak e—my
comfort tea at that time—and dr ove home. It was still dark
when I  pulled  up. I didn’t car e. I stripped oﬀ my work clothes,
put on some sweats and l aced up my running shoes. I hadn’t
run in over a year, but I hit the str eets r eady to go four  miles.
I l asted 400 y ar ds. My heart raced. I was so dizzy I had to sit
down on the edge of th e golf course to catch my br eath
befor e makin g the slow walk back to my house, wher e my
melted shak e was waiting to comfort me in yet another
failur e. I grabbed it, slurped, and slumped into my sofa. My
eyes welled with  tears.
Who the fuck did I think I was? I was bor n nothing, I’d pr oven
nothing, and I still wasn’t worth a damn thing. David
Goggins, a Navy SEAL? Y eah, right. What a pipe dr eam. I
couldn’t even run down the block for ﬁve minutes. All my
fears and insecurities I’d bottled up for my entir e life started
raining down  on my head. I was on the ver ge of giving in and
giving up for good. That’s  when I found my old, beat to shit
VHS copy of R ock y (the one I’d had for ﬁf teen years), slid itinto th e machine, and fast forwar ded to my favorite scene:
R ound  14.
The original R ock y is still one of my all - time  favorite ﬁlms
because it’s about a know - nothing  jour neyman ﬁghter living
in poverty with no pr osp ects. Even his own trainer won’t
work with him. Then, out of the blue, he’s given a title shot
with th e cha mpion, Apollo  Cr eed, the most fear ed ﬁghter in
history, a man that has knock ed out every opponent he’s
ever faced. All R ock y wants is to be the ﬁrst to go the
distance with  Cr eed. That alone will mak e him someone he
could be pr oud of for the ﬁrst time in his  life.
The ﬁght is closer than anyone anticipated, bloody and
intense, and by the middle r ounds R ock y is taking on mor e
and mor e punishment. He ’s losing the ﬁght, and in  R ound 14
he gets knock ed down early, but pops right back up in the
center of the ring. Apollo moves in, stalking him l ik e a lion.
He thr ows sharp lef t jabs, hits a slow - footed  R o ck y with a
staggering combination, lands a punishing right hook, and
another . He backs R ock y into a cor ner . R ock y’s leg s ar e jelly .
He ca n’t even muster the str ength to raise his ar ms in
defense. Apo llo slams another right hook into the side of
R ock y’s head , then a lef t hook, and a vicious right - handed
upper cut that puts R ock y  down.
Apollo r etr ea ts to the opposite cor ner with his ar ms held
high, but even face down in that ring, R ock y doesn ’t give up.
As the r efer ee begins his ten - count , R ock y squir ms towar d
the r opes. Mick ey, his ow n trainer, ur ges him to s tay down,
but R ock y isn’t hearing it . He pulls himself up to one knee,
then all fours. The r efer ee hits six as R ock y grabs the r opes
and rises up. The cr owd r oars, and Apollo tur ns to see him
still standin g. R ock y waves Apollo over . The champ’s
shoulders slump in  disbelief .
The ﬁght isn’t over  yet.I t ur ne d oﬀ the television and thought about my o wn life. It
was a life devoid of any drive and passion, but I  knew if I
continued to sur r ender to my fear and my fe elings of
inadequacy, I would be allowing them to dictate my futur e
for ever . My only other cho ice was to try to ﬁnd the power in
the emotions that had laid me low, har ness and use them to
empower me to rise up, which is e xactly what I  did.
I dumped that shak e in the trash, laced up my shoes, and hit
the str eets a gain. On my ﬁrst run, I felt sever e pain in my
legs and my lungs at a quarter mile. My heart raced and I
stopped. This  time I felt the same pain, my heart raced lik e a
car run ning h ot, but I ran  thr ough it and the pain faded. By
the time I bent over to catch my br eath, I’d run a full  mile.
That’s when I ﬁrst r ealized that not all physical and mental
limitations ar e r eal, and t hat I had a habit of giving up way
too soon. I also knew t hat it would tak e every ounce of
courage and toughness I could muster to pu ll oﬀ the
impossible. I was staring at hours, days, and weeks of non -
stop  suﬀering. I w ould have to push myself to the very  edge
of my mortality . I had to accept the very r eal possibility that I
might die because this time I wouldn’t quit, no matter how
fast m y hear t raced and no matter how much pain  I was in.
T r ouble was ther e was no battle plan to follow, no blueprint. I
had to cr eate one fr om  scratch.
The typ ical d ay went something lik e this. I’d wak e up at 4:30
a.m., m unch a banana, and hit the ASV AB books. Ar ound 5
a.m., I’d tak e that book to my stationary bik e wher e I’d
sweat and study for two hours. R emember, my body was a
mess. I couldn’t run multiple miles yet, so I had to bur n as
many c alories as I could o n the bik e. A f ter that I’d drive over
to Car m el High School and jump into the pool for a two - hour
swim. F r om ther e I hit the gym for a cir cuit work out that
included the bench pr ess , the incline pr ess, and lots of lege x er cises. Bu lk was the e nemy . I needed r eps, and I did ﬁve
or six sets of 100–200 r eps each. Then it was back to the
stationary bik e for two mor e  hours.
I was constan tly hungry . Dinner was my one true meal each
day, but ther e wasn’t much to it. I ate a grilled or sautéed
chick en br east and some sautéed vegetables along with a
thimble of rice. A f ter dinn er I’d do another two hours on the
bik e, h it the sack, wak e up and do it all over again , knowing
the odds wer e stack ed sk y high against me. W hat I was
trying to achieve is lik e a D - student  applying to Harvar d, or
walking into a casino and putting every single dollar you own
on a number in r oulette and acting as if win ning is a
for egone conclusion. I was betting everything I had on
myself with no  guarantees.
I weig hed myself twice daily, and within two weeks I’d
dr opped twenty - ﬁve  p ounds. My pr ogr ess onl y impr oved as I
k ept grinding, and the weight started peeling oﬀ. T en days
later I was a t 250, light enough to begin doing push - ups ,
pull - ups , an d t o start  running my ass oﬀ. I’d still wak e up, hit
the stationary bik e, the pool, and the gym, but I also
incorporated two -, thr ee -, and four - mile  runs. I ditched my
running shoes and or der ed a pair of Bates Lites, the same
boots S EAL c andidates we ar in BUD/S, and started running in
those.
W ith so much eﬀort, you’ d think my nights would h ave been
r estful, but they wer e ﬁlled with anxiety . My stomach gr owled
and my mind swirled. I’d dr eam of comple x ASV AB  questions
and dr ead the ne xt day’s work outs. I was putting out so
much, on almost no fuel, that depr ession became a natural
side eﬀect. My splintering mar riage was veerin g towar d
divor ce. P am made it very clear that she and my
stepdaughter would not b e moving to San Diego with me, if
by some miracle I could pull this oﬀ. They stayed  in Brazilmost of the time, and when I was all alone in Car mel, I was in
tur moil. I felt both worth less and helpless as my endless
str eam of self - defeating  thoughts pick ed up  steam.
When depr es sion smothe rs you, it blots out all light and
leaves you with nothing to cling onto for hope. All you see is
negativity . F or me, the only way to mak e it thr ough  that was
to f eed oﬀ m y depr ession . I had to ﬂip it and convin ce myself
that al l that self - doubt  and anxiety was conﬁr mation that I
was no  longe r living an ai mless life. My task may t ur n out to
be impossibl e but at least I was back on a motherfucking
mission.
Some nights, when I was feeling low, I’d call Schaljo . He was
always in the oﬃce early  in the mor ning and late at night. I
didn’t conﬁde in him about my depr ession because I didn’t
want h im to doubt me. I u sed those calls to pump m yself up.
I to ld h im ho w many pounds I dr opped and how much work I
was putting in, and he r eminded me to k eep studying for
that  ASV AB.
R oger  that.
I had the R ock y soundtrack on cassette and I’d listen to
Going the Distance for inspiratio n. On long b ik e rides and
runs, with those hor ns blasting in my brain, I’d imagine
myself going thr ough BUD/S, diving into cold water, and
crushing Hell  W eek. I was wishing, I was hoping, but by the
time I was down to 250, my quest to qualif y for the SEALs
wasn’t a daydr eam anymor e. I had a r eal chance to
accomplish something most people, including myself,
thought was impossible. Still, ther e wer e bad days. One
mor ning not long af ter I d ipped below 250, I weighed in and
had on ly lost  a pound fr o m the day befor e. I had  so much
weight to lose I could n ot aﬀor d to plateau. That’s all I
thought abou t while running six miles and swimming two . Iwas e xhausted and sor e when I ar rived in the gy m for my
typical thr ee - hour  cir cuit.
A f ter r ocking over 100 pull - ups  in a series of sets, I was back
on the bar fo r a max set  with no ceiling. Going in, my goal
was to get to twelve but my hands wer e bur ning ﬁr e as I
str etched my  chin over th e bar for the tenth time. F or weeks,
the te mptation to pull back had been ever pr esent, and I
always r efused. That day, however, the pain was too much
and af ter my eleventh pull - up , I gave in, dr opped down, and
ﬁnished my work out, one pull - up  shy .
That one r ep stayed with me, along with that one pound. I
tried to  get them out of m y head but they wouldn’t leave me
the fuc k alone. They taunted me on the drive hom e, and at
my kitchen table while I ate a sliver of grilled chick en and a
bland, bak ed  potato . I knew I wouldn’t sleep t hat night
unless I did something about it, so I grabbed my  k eys.
“Y ou cut cor ners and you  ar e not gonna fucking m ak e it,” I
said, out loud, as I dr ove back to the gym. “Ther e ar e no
shortcuts for you, Goggins!”
I did my entir e pull - up  work o ut ove r again. One missed pull -
up  co st me a n e xtra 250, and ther e would be similar
episodes. Wh enever I cut a run or swim short beca use I was
hungry or tir ed, I’d always go back and beat myself down
even har der . That was the only way I could manage the
demons in my mind. Either way ther e would be suﬀering. I
had to choose between physical suﬀering in the moment,
and the mental anguish o f wondering if that one m issed pull -
up , t hat last lap in the pool, the quarter mile I skipped  on the
r oad or trail, would end up costing me an opport unity of a
lifetime. It was an easy choice. When it came to the SEALs, I
wasn’t leaving anything up to  chance.On the  eve of the ASV A B, with four weeks to go befor e
training, mak ing weight was no longer a wor ry . I w as alr eady
down to 215 pounds and  was faster and str onger than I’d
ever been. I was runnin g six miles a day, bicy cling over
twenty miles , and swimming mor e than two . All of it in the
dead of winter . My favorite run was the six - mile  Monon trail,
an asphalt bik e and walking path that laced thr ough the
tr ees in  Indianapolis. It was the domain of cyclists and soccer
moms with jogging str ollers, week end war riors and seniors.
By then Schaljo had pas sed along the Navy SEAL war ning
or der . It included all the work outs I would be e xpected to
complete during ﬁrst pha se of BUD/S, and I was happy to
double them. I knew that 190 men usually class - up  for a
typical SEAL training and only about forty people mak e it all
the way thr ough. I didn’t want to be just one of those forty . I
wanted to be the  best.
But I had to pass the dam n ASV AB ﬁrst. I’d been cramming
every spar e second. If I wasn’t working out, I was at my
kitchen table , memorizin g for mulas and cycling  thr ough
hundr eds of vocabulary wor ds. W ith my physica l training
going well, all my anxiety stuck to the ASV AB lik e paper clips
to a magnet.  This would be my last chance to tak e the test
befor e my eligibility for the SEALs e xpir ed. I wa sn’t very
smart, and based on past academic perfor mance ther e was
no good r eason to believe  I’d pass with a scor e high enough
to q ualif y for the SEALs. If I failed, my dr eam would die, and
I’d be ﬂoating without purpose once  again.
The te st was held in a small classr oom on F ort Benjamin
Har rison in Indianapolis.  Ther e wer e about thirty people
ther e, all of u s young. Most wer e just out of high s chool. W e
wer e each assigned an old - school  desktop computer . In the
past month,  the test had been digitized and I wasn’t
e xperienced with computers. I didn’t even think I could workthe damn machine let al one answer the questions, but the
pr ogram pr oved idiot pr oof and I settled  in.
The ASV AB has ten sectio ns, and I was br eezing thr ough until
I r eached Mechanical Compr ehension, my truth serum.
W ithin the hour I would have a decent idea if I’d been lying
to m yself or if I had the  raw stuﬀ necessary to become a
SEAL. Whenever a question stumped me, I mark ed my
worksheet with a dash. Ther e wer e about thirty questions in
that section and by the  time I completed the test, I’d
guessed at least ten time s. I needed some of them  to go my
way or I was  out.
A f ter c ompleting the ﬁnal section, I was pr ompte d to send
the entir e bundle to the administrator’s computer at the
fr ont o f the r oom wher e the scor e would be tabulated
instantly . I peek ed over my monitor and saw h im sitting
ther e, waiting. I pointed, click ed, and lef t the r oom. Buzzing
with n ervous ener gy, I paced the parking lot for a few
minutes befor e ﬁnally ducking into my Honda A ccor d, but I
didn’t start the engine. I couldn’t  leave.
I s at in the fr ont seat for ﬁf teen minutes with a thousand -
yar d  star e. It would be at least two days befor e Schaljo
would call with my r esults, but the answer to the riddle that
was m y futur e was alr eady solved. I knew e xactly wher e it
was, and I ha d to know the truth. I gather ed myse lf, walk ed
back in, and appr oached the fortune  teller .
“Y ou g otta te ll me what I got on this fucking test, man,” I
said. He peer ed up at me, surprised, but he didn’t  buckle.
“I’m sor ry, son. This is the  gover nment. Ther e’s a system for
how th ey do things,” he said. “I didn’t mak e the rules and I
can’t bend  them.”“Sir, you have no idea what this test means to me, to my life.
It’s everythin g!” He look ed into my glassy eyes for what felt
lik e ﬁve minutes, then tur ned towar d his  machine.
“I’m b r eaking every rule  in the book right now,” he said.
“ Goggins, right?” I nodded and came ar ound behin d his seat
as he scr olled thr ough ﬁles. “Ther e you ar e. Congratulations,
you scor ed 65. That’s a g r eat scor e.” He was r efer encing my
overall, but I didn’t car e a bout that. Everything hing ed on my
getting a 50- spot  wher e it counted  most.
“What did I get on mechanical compr ehension?” He
shrugged, click ed and sc r olled, and ther e it was. My new
favorite number glowed on his scr een: 50.
“YES!” I shouted. “YES! YES!”
Ther e was still a handful  of others taking the test, but this
was th e happ iest momen t in my life and I couldn’t stiﬂe it. I
k ept scr eaming “YES!” at the top of my lu ngs. The
administrator damn near fell out of his chair and everyone in
that r o om st ar ed at me lik e I was crazy . If they o nly knew
how crazed I’d been! F or two months I’d dedicated my entir e
e xistence to this one moment, and I was damn well gonna
enjoy it. I rushed to my car and scr eamed some  mor e.
“ FUCK  YEAH!”
On my drive home I ca lled my mom. She was the one
person, aside fr om Schaljo, who witnessed my
metamorphosis. “I fucking did it,” I told her, te ars in my
eyes. “I fucking did it! I’m going to be a  SEAL.”
When Schaljo came to work the ne xt day, he got  the news
and called me up. He’d s ent in my r ecruitment pack age and
had just hear d back that I was in! I could tell he was happyfor me, and p r oud that what he saw in me the ﬁrst time we
met tur ned out to be  r eal.
But it wasn’t all happy days. My wife had give n me an
implied ultim atum, and now I had a decision to mak e.
Abandon the  opportunity  I’d work ed so har d for  and stay
mar ried, or get divor ced and go try to become a SEAL. In the
end, my choice didn’t ha ve anything to do with m y feelings
for P am or her father . He’d apologized to me, by the way . It
was about who I was and who I wanted to be. I was a
prisoner in my own my m ind and this opportunity was my
only chance to br eak  fr ee.
I c eleb rated my victory the way any SEAL candidate should. I
put the fuck out. The fo llowing mor ning and for  the ne xt
thr ee weeks I spent time in the pool, strapped with a sixteen -
pound  we ight belt. I swam und erwater for ﬁf ty meters at a
time a nd walk ed the length of the pool underwater, with a
brick in each hand, all on a single br eath. The water would
not own my ass this  time.
When I was done, I’d sw im a mile or two, then head to a
pond near my mother’s home. R emember, this was Indiana—
the American  Midwest—in  December . The tr ees wer e nak ed.
Icicles hung lik e crystals fr om the eaves of houses and snow
blank eted the earth in all dir ections, but the pond wasn’t
completely fr ozen yet. I waded into the icy water, dr essed in
camo pants, a br own sh ort sleeved t - shirt , an d boots, laid
back and look ed into the gray sk y . The hypother mic water
washed over  me, the pa in was e x cruciating, and  I fucking
loved i t. A f ter a few minutes I got out and started running,
water sloshing in my boots, sand in my underwear . W ithin
seconds my t - shirt  was fr ozen t o my chest, my pants iced at
the  cuﬀs.
I hit the Monon trail. Steam pour ed fr om my nose and mouth
as I grunte d and slalomed speed - walk ers  and joggers.Civilians. Their heads tur n ed as I pick ed up speed and began
sprinting, lik e  R ock y in downtown Philly . I ran as fast as I
could for as long as I c ould, fr om a past that no longer
deﬁned me, towar d a futur e undeter mined. All I knew was
that ther e would be pain and ther e would be  purpose.
And that I was  r eady .C H A L L E N G E  # 3
The ﬁr st step on the jou r ney towar d a calloused mind is
stepping outside your com fort zone on a r egular basis. Dig
out yo ur jour nal again and write down all the things you
don’t l ik e to do or that mak e you uncomfortable. E specially
those things you know ar e good for  you.
Now go do one of them, and do it  again.
In t he coming pages, I’ll be asking you to mir r or what you
just r e ad to some degr ee , but ther e is no need for you to
ﬁnd your own impossible  task and achieve it on  the fast
track. This is not about changing your life instantly, it’s
about moving the need le bit by bit and making those
changes sustainable. That means digging down to the micr o
level and doing somethin g that sucks every day . E ven if it’s
as simple as making your bed, doing the dishes, ir oning
your clothes , or getting up befor e dawn and running two
miles e ach d ay . Once that becomes comfortable, tak e it to
ﬁve, then ten miles. If you alr eady do all those things, ﬁnd
something you ar en’t doi ng. W e all have ar eas in our lives
we either ignor e or can im pr ove upon. F ind yours.  W e of ten
choose to focus on our str engths rather than our
weaknesses. Use this time to mak e your weaknesses your
str engths.
Doing things—even small things—that ma k e you
uncomfortable will help mak e you str ong. The mor e of ten
you get uncomfortable the str onger you’ll become, and soon
you’ll develo p a mor e pr oductive, can - do  dialogue with
yourself in str essful  situations.T ak e a photo or video o f yourself in the discomfort zone,
post it on so cial media describing what you’r e d oing and
why, and don’t for get to include the hashtags
#discomfortzone #pathofmostr esistance #canthurtme
#impossibletask.C H A P T E R  F O U R
4 .  T AKING SOULS
T HE  FIRS T  CONCUSSION  GRENADE  EXPL ODED  A T  CL OSE  R ANGE , AND  FROM  THERE
everything unraveled in slow motion. One minute we wer e
chilling in the common r oom, bullshitting, watching war
movies, getting pumped up for the battle we knew was
coming. Then that ﬁrst e xplosion led to another, and
suddenly P sy cho P ete was in our faces, scr eaming at the top
of his lungs, his cheeks ﬂ ushed candy apple r ed, that vein in
his right temple thr obbing. When he scr eamed, his eyes
bugged out and his whole body  shook.
“ Br eak! The fuck! Out! Move! Move! Move!”
My boa t cr ew sprinted for the door single - ﬁle , j ust lik e we’d
planned. Out side, Navy SEALs wer e ﬁring their M60s into the
darkness towar d some inv isible enemy . It was the bad dr eam
we’d been waiting for ou r entir e lives: the lucid nightmar e
that w ould d eﬁne or kill u s. Every impulse we had told us to
hit the  dirt, but at that moment, movement was  our only
option.
The r epetitive, deep bass thud of machine - gun  ﬁr e
penetrated our guts, the orange halo fr om another e xplosion
in t he near d istance pr ovided a shock of violent beauty, and
our hearts hammer ed as we gather ed on the Grinder
awaiting or ders. This wa s war alright, but it wouldn’t befought on some for eign sh or e. This one, lik e most battles we
ﬁght in life, would be won or lost in our own  minds.
P sycho P ete stomped the pock ed asphalt, his br ow  slick with
sweat, the muzzle of his  riﬂe steaming in the fog gy night.
“W elcome to Hell W eek, gentlemen,” he said, calmly this
time, i n that sing - song  Cali - surfer  drawl of his. He look ed us
up and  down  lik e a pr ed ator eyeing his kill. “It w ill be my
gr eat pleasur e to watch you  suﬀer .”
Oh, and ther e would be  suﬀering. P sycho set the tempo,
called out the push - ups , sit - ups , and ﬂutter kicks, the
jumping lunges and dive bombers. In between, h e and his
fellow instructors hosed us down with fr eezing water,
cackling the whole damn time. Ther e wer e countless r eps
and set af ter set with no end in  sight.
My classmates wer e gather ed close, each of us on our own
stenciled fr og footprints, overlook ed by a statue of our
patr on saint:  The F r ogman, a scaly alien cr eatur e fr om the
deep with webbed feet and hands, sharp claws, and a
motherfucking six - pack . T o his lef t was the infamous brass
bell. Ever since that m or ning when I came home fr om
cockr oach duty and got suck ed into the Navy SEAL show, it
was this place that I’d sou ght. The Grinder : a slab of asphalt
dripping with history and  misery .
Basic Underw ater Demo lition/SEAL (BUD/S) training is six
months long and divided into thr ee phases. F irst Phase is all
about physic al training, or PT . Second Phase is div e training,
wher e we lear n how to navigate underwater and deploy
stealthy, closed cir cuit diving systems that emit no bubbles
and r ecycle our carbon dio xide into br eathable air . Thir d
Phase is land warfar e training. But when most people pictur e
BUD/S they think of F irst P hase because those ar e the weeks
that tenderiz e new r ecruits until the class is literally gr ound
down f r om about 120 guys to the har d, gleaming spine thatar e the twenty - ﬁve  to forty guys  who ar e mor e worthy of the
T rident. The emblem that tells the world we ar e not to be
fuck ed  with.
BUD/S instructors do that by working guys out beyond their
per ceived lim its, by challenging their manhood, an d insisting
on obj ective physical standar ds of str ength, stamina, and
agility . Standar ds that ar e  tested. In those ﬁrst thr ee weeks
of train ing we had to, am ong other things, climb a vertical
ten - meter  r ope, hammer a half - mile - long  obstacle course
studded with American Ninja W ar rior type cha llenges in
under ten minutes, and run four miles on the sand  in under
thirty - two  minutes. But if you ask me, all that was child’s
play . It couldn’t even compar e to the crucible of F irst  Phase.
Hell W eek is something entir ely diﬀer ent. It’s medieval and it
comes at you fast, detonating in just the thir d week of
training. Whe n the thr obbing ache in our muscles and joints
was ratchete d up high and we lived day and night with an
edgy, hyperventilating feeling of our br eath getting out fr ont
of o ur physical r hythm, of our lungs inﬂating and deﬂating
lik e ca nvas bags squeeze d tight in a demon’s ﬁsts, for 130
hours straight. That’s a test that goes way beyond the
physical and r eveals your heart and character . Mor e than
anything, it r eveals your mindset, which is e xactly what it’s
designed to  do .
All of this ha ppened at the Naval Special W arfar e Command
Center on prissy - ass  Cor onado Island, a Souther n Califor nia
tourist trap that tucks into slender P oint L oma and shelters
the San Diego Marina fr om the open P aciﬁc Ocean. But even
Cali’s g olden sun couldn’t pr etty up the Grinder, and thank
God for that. I lik ed it ugly . That slab of agony was everything
I’d ever wanted. Not because I loved to suﬀer, but because I
needed to know whether or not I had what it took to  belong.
Thing is, most people don’t.By the  time Hell W eek started, at least forty guys had
alr eady quit,  and when they did they wer e for ced to walk
over to the bell, ring it thr ee times, and place their helmet on
the co ncr ete. The ringin g of the bell was ﬁrst br ought in
during the V ietnam era because so many guys wer e quitting
during evolu tions and just walking oﬀ to the bar r acks. The
bell was a way to k eep track of guys, but since then it’s
become a ritual that a man has to perfor m to own the fact
that he’s quitting. T o the  quitter, the bell is closur e. T o me,
every clang sounded lik e  pr ogr ess.
I neve r lik ed P sycho much, but I couldn’t quibble with the
speciﬁcs of his job. He an d his fellow instructors wer e ther e
to cull the her d. Plus, he wasn’t going af ter the runts. He was
in m y face plenty, and g uys bigger than me too . Even the
smaller dude s wer e studs. I was one man in a ﬂee t of alpha
specimens fr om back East and down South, the blue - collar
and big - money  surf beaches of Califor nia, a few fr om cor n
country lik e me, and plen ty fr om the T e xas rangeland. Every
BUD/S class has their shar e of har d - ass  backcountry T e xans.
No state puts mor e SEALs  in the pipeline. Must be something
in the barbecue, but P syc ho didn’t play favorites. No matter
wher e we wer e fr om or who we wer e, he linger ed lik e a
shadow we couldn’t shak e. Laughing, scr eaming, or quietly
taunting us to our face, a ttempting to bur r ow into  the brain
of any man he tried to  br eak.
Despite all that, the ﬁrst hour of Hell W eek was ac tually fun.
During br eak out, that mad rush of e xplosions, shooting, and
shouting, you  ar e not eve n thinking about the nightmar e to
come. Y ou’r e riding an adr enaline high because you know
you’r e fulﬁlling a rite of passage within a hallowed war rior
tradition. Guys ar e looki ng ar ound the Grinder, practically
giddy, thinkin g, “Y eah, we’r e in Hell W eek, mothe rfuck ers!”
Ah, but r eality has a wa y of kicking everyone in the teeth
sooner or  later .“Y ou call this putting out?” P sycho P ete ask ed no one in
particular . “This may be the single sor riest class we ever put
thr ough our pr ogram. Y ou men ar e straight up embar rassing
yourselves.”
He r eli shed this part of th e job. Stepping over and between
us, his  boot print in our po oling sweat and saliva, snot, tears,
and blood. He thought he was har d. All the instructors did,
and they wer e because they wer e SEALs. That fact alone
placed them in rar e air . “Y ou boys couldn’t have held my jock
when I went thr ough Hell W eek, I’ll tell you that  much.”
I s mile d to myself and k ept hammering as P sycho brushed
by . He was built lik e a tailback, quick and str ong, but was he
a mortal fucking weapon during his Hell W eek? Sir, I doubt
that very fucking much, sir!
He cau ght the eye of h is boss, the F irst Phase Oﬃcer in
Char ge. Ther e was no doubt about him. He didn’t talk a
whole lot and didn’t hav e to . He was 6’1”, but he cast a
longer shado w . Dude was jack ed too . I’m talking about 225
pounds of muscle wrapped tight as steel, without an ounce
of sympathy .  He look ed lik e a Silverback Gorilla (SB G), and
loomed lik e a Godfather of pain, making silent calculations,
taking mental  notes.
“Sir, m y dick ’s getting stiﬀ just thinking about these gaping
vaginas weeping and quitting lik e whiny little bitches this
week,” P sych o said. SB G oﬀer ed half a nod as P syc ho star ed
thr ough me. “ Oh, and you will quit,” he said sof tly . “I’ll mak e
sur e of  that.”
P sycho’s thr eats wer e spo okier when he deliver ed them in a
r elax ed tone lik e that, but ther e wer e plenty of times when
his eyes went dark, his br ow twisted, the blood rus hed to his
face, and he unleashed a scr eam that built fr om t he tips of
his toes to the cr own of his bald head. An hour into HellW eek, he knelt down, pr essed his face within an i nch of my
own while I ﬁnished another set of push - ups , and let  loose.
“ Hit the surf, you miserable fucking  tur ds!”
W e’d b een in BUD/S for nearly thr ee weeks by then, and
we’d raced up and over the ﬁf teen - foot  be r m that divided
the beach fr om the cinderblock sprawl of oﬃces, lock er
r ooms, bar racks, and classr ooms that is th e BUD/S
compound plenty of tim es. Usually to lie back in the
shallows, fully dr essed, th en r oll in the sand—until we wer e
cover ed in sand fr om hea d to toe—befor e char ging back to
the Grinder, dripping hea vy with salt water and sand, which
ramped up the degr ee of diﬃculty on the pull - up  bar . That
ritual was called getting wet and sandy, and they wanted
sand in our ears, up our noses, and in every oriﬁce of our
body, but this time we wer e on the ver ge of something called
surf tortur e, which is a special kind of  beast.
As instructed, we char ged into the surf scr eaming lik e
senseis . F ully clothed, ar ms link e d, we waded into the impact
zone. The surf was angry that moonless night, nearly head
high, and the waves wer e r olling thunder that bar r eled and
foamed in sets of thr ee and four . Cold water shriveled our
balls and swiped the br e ath fr om our lungs as t he waves
thrashed  us.
This was early May, and in the spring the ocean oﬀ Cor onado
ranges fr om 59–63 degr ee s. W e bobbed up and dow n as one,
a pearl strand of ﬂoating heads scanning the horizon for any
hint of swell we prayed we’d see coming befor e it towed us
under . The surfers in our c r ew detected doom ﬁrst and called
out the  wave s so we cou ld duck dive just in time . A f ter ten
minutes or so, P sycho or der ed us back to land. On the ver ge
of hyp other mia, we scram bled fr om the surf zone and stood
at attention, while being check ed by the doctor for
hypother mia. That cycle would continue to r epeat itself . Thesk y was smear ed orange and r ed. The temperatur e dr opped
sharply as night loomed  close.
“Say goodby e to the sun, gents,” SB G said. He made us
wave a t the setting sun. A symbolic acknowledgem ent of an
inconvenient truth. W e wer e about to fr eeze our natural
asses  oﬀ.
A f ter an hour, we fell back into our six - man  b oat cr ews, and
stood nut to butt, huddling tight to get war m, b ut it was
futile. Bones wer e rattling up and down that beach. Guys
wer e jackhammering and sniﬄing, a physical state r evealing
the quaking conditions of splintering minds, which wer e just
now coming to grips with  the r eality that this shit had only
just  begun.
Even o n the har dest days of F irst Phase prior to Hell W eek,
when the sheer volume of r ope climbs and push - ups , pull -
ups , an d ﬂutter kicks crushes  your spirit, you can ﬁnd a way
out. Because  you know that no matter how much it sucks,
you’ll h ead home that night, meet friends for dinner, see a
movie, mayb e get some pussy, and sleep in your own bed.
The po int is, even on mi serable days you can ﬁxate on an
escape fr om hell that’s  r eal.
Hell W eek oﬀers no such  love. Especially on day o ne, when
an hour in t hey had us standing, linking ar ms, facing the
P aciﬁc Ocean , wading in and out of the surf for hours. In
between we wer e gif ted  sof t sand sprints to war m up.
Usually they had us car ry our rigid inﬂatable boat or a log
over head, but the war mth, if it ever ar rived, was always
short - lived  because every ten minutes they r otated us back
into the  water .
The clock tick ed slowly that ﬁrst night as the cold seeped in,
colonizing our mar r ow so thor oughly the runs stopped doing
any g ood. Ther e would be no mor e bombs, no mor eshooting, and very little yelling. Instead, an eerie quiet
e xpanded and deadened our spirit. In the ocean, all any of us
could h ear w er e the waves going over head, the seawater we
accidentally s wallowed r oiling in our guts, and our own teeth
chattering.
When you’r e that cold and str essed, the mind cannot
compr ehend the ne xt 12 0- plus  h ours . F ive and a half d ays
without sleep cannot be br ok en up into small pieces. Ther e is
no way to sy stematically attack it, which is why every single
person who has ever tri ed to become a SEAL h as ask ed
himself one simple question during their ﬁrst dose of surf
tortur e:
“Why am I  her e?”
Those innocuous wor ds bubbled up in our spinning minds
each time we got suck ed under a monster wave at midnight,
when we wer e alr eady bor derline hypother mic. Because
nobody has  to become a SEAL. W e wer en’t fucking drafted .
Becoming a SEAL is a ch oice. And what that single sof tball
question r evealed in the heat of battle is that each second
we r em ained in training was also a choice, which made the
entir e notion of becoming a SEAL seem lik e masochism. It’s
voluntary tor tur e. And that mak es no sense at all to the
rational mind, which is why those four wor ds unravel so
many  men.
The ins tructors know all of this, of course, which is  why they
stop yelling early on. Inst ead, as the night wor e o n, P sycho
P ete console d us lik e a concer ned older br other . He oﬀer ed
us h ot soup, a war m shower, blank ets, and a ride back to the
bar racks. That was the bait he set for quitters to  snap up,
and he harvested helmets lef t and right. He was taking the
souls o f those who caved because they couldn’t answer that
simple question. I get it. When it’s only Sunday and you
know you’r e going to F ri day and you’r e alr eady far colderthan y ou’ve ever been, you’r e tempted to believe  that you
can’t hack it and that nobody can. Mar ried guys wer e
thinking, I could be at home, cuddled up to my beautiful wife
instead of shivering and suﬀering . Single guys wer e thinking,
I could be on the hunt for pussy right  now .
It’s tou gh to ignor e that kind of glittering lur e, but this was
my second lap thr ough th e early stages of BUD/S. I’d tasted
the evil of Hell W eek as part of Class 230. I didn’ t mak e it,
but I didn’t  quit. I was  pulled out on a medical af ter
contracting d ouble pneum onia. I deﬁed doctor’s or ders thr ee
times and tried to stay in the ﬁght, but they eventually
for ced me to the bar racks and r olled me back to day one,
week one of Class  231.
I wasn ’t all the way healed up fr om that bout of p neumonia
when my second BUD/S c lass kick ed oﬀ. My lungs wer e still
ﬁlled w ith mucus and each cough shook my chest and
sounded lik e  a rak e was scraping the inside of m y alveoli.
Still, I lik ed m y chances a lot better this time ar oun d because
I wa s p r epar ed, and beca use I was in a boat cr ew thick with
bad  motherfuck ers.
BUD/S boat cr ews ar e so rted by height because those ar e
the gu ys who will help yo u car ry your boat everywher e you
go onc e Hell W eek begins. Size alone didn’t guarantee your
teammates w ould be tough, however, and our guys wer e a
cr ew of squar e - peg  misﬁts.
Ther e was me, the e xter minator who had to dr op 100 pounds
and ta k e the ASV AB test twice just to get to SEAL training,
only to be r olled back almost immediately . W e also had the
late Chris K yle. Y ou know him as the deadliest snip er in Navy
history . He was so successful, the hajjis in F allujah put an
$80,000 bounty on his head and he became a living legend
among the Marines he pr otected as a member of Seal T eam
Thr ee. He won a Silver Star and four Br onze Stars  for valor,lef t th e military, and wr ote a book, American Sniper , that
became a hit movie star ring Bradley fucking Cooper . But
back then he was a simpl e T e xas hayseed r odeo cowboy who
bar ely said a damn  wor d.
Then ther e was Bill Br own , ak a F r eak Br own. Most p eople just
called him F r eak, and he hated it because he’d been tr eated
lik e on e his whole damn life. In many ways he was the white
version of David Goggin s. He came up tough in the river
towns of South Jersey . Old er kids in the neighbor hood bullied
him because  of his clef t palate or because he wa s slow in
class, which is how that nickname stuck. He got into enough
ﬁghts over it that he eve ntually landed in a youth detention
center for a six - month  s tr etch. By t he time he w as nineteen
he was living on his own in the hood, trying to mak e ends
meet a s a gas station at tendant. It wasn’t working. He had
no coa t and no car . He commuted everywher e on  a rusted
out ten - speed  bik e, literally fr eezing his balls oﬀ. One day
af ter work, he stopped into a Navy r ecruitment oﬃce
because he knew he needed structur e and purpose, and
some war m clothes. They told him about the SEALs, and he
was intrigued, but he couldn’t swim. Just lik e me, he taught
himself, and af ter thr ee attempts he ﬁnally passed the SEAL
swim  test.
Ne xt thing he knew, Br ow n was in BUD/S, wher e that F r eak
nickname followed him. He r ock ed PT and sailed thr ough
F irst Phase, but he wasn’ t nearly as solid in the classr oom.
Navy SEAL dive training is as tough intellectually as it is
physically, b ut he scraped by and got within two weeks of
becoming a BUD/S gradu ate when, in one of his ﬁnal land
warfar e evolutions, he failed r e - assembling  his weapon in a
timed evolution known as weapons practical . Br ow n hit his
tar gets but missed the time, and he ﬂunk ed out of  BUD/S at
the bitter  end.But he didn’t give up. N o sir, F r eak Br own wasn’t going
anywher e. I’d hear d stories about him befor e he washed up
with me in Class 231. He had two chips on his shoulders, and
I lik ed him immediately . H e was har d as hell and e xactly the
kind of guy I signed up to go to war with. When we car ried
our boat fr om the Grinde r to the sand for the ﬁrst time, I
made s ur e w e wer e the tw o men at the fr ont, wher e the boat
is at its heav iest. “ F r eak Br own,” I shouted, “ we w ill be the
pillars of Boat Cr ew T wo!” He look ed over, and I glar ed  back.
“ Don’t fucking call me that, Goggins,” he said with a  snarl.
“W ell d on’t you move out of position, son! Y ou an d me, up
fr ont, all fucking  week!”
“ R oger that,” he  said.
I to ok the le ad of Boat Cr ew T wo fr om the begin ning, and
getting all six of us thr ough Hell W eek was my singular focus.
Everyone fell in line because I’d alr eady pr oven myself, and
not just on the Grinder . In the days befor e Hell W eek began I
got it into my head that we needed to steal the Hell W eek
schedule fr om our instructors. I told our cr ew as much one
night when we wer e hanging in the classr oom, which
doubled as our lounge. My wor ds fell on deaf ea rs. A few
guys laughed but everyo ne else ignor ed me and went back
to their shallow ass  conversations.
I u nder stood why . It made no sense. How wer e we supposed
to get a copy of their shi t? And even if we did, wouldn’t the
anticipation m ak e it worse? And what if we got cau ght? W as
the r ewar d worth the  risk?
I be lieved it w as, because I’d tasted Hell W eek. Br o wn and a
few other guys had too, and we knew how easy it was to
think about quitting when  confr onted with levels of pain and
e xhaustion you didn’t think possible. One hundr ed and thirtyhours of suﬀering may as  well be a thousand when  you know
you ca n’t sle ep and that t her e will be no r elief anytime soon.
And w e knew something  else too . Hell W eek was a mind
game. The instructors used our suﬀering to pick and peel
away our layers, not to ﬁnd the ﬁttest athletes. T o ﬁnd the
str ongest minds. That’s something the quitters didn’t
understand until it was too  late.
Everything in life is a mind game! Whenever we get swept
under by life’s dramas, lar ge and small, we ar e for getting
that no matter how ba d the pain gets, no m atter how
har r owing the tortur e, all bad things end. That for getting
happens the second we give contr ol over our emotions and
actions to other people, w hich can easily happen when pain
is p eaking. During Hell W e ek, the men who quit felt lik e they
wer e r unning on a tr eadmill tur ned way the fuck u p with no
dashboar d w ithin r each. But, whether they ever ﬁgur ed it out
or not, that was an illusion they fell  for .
I went  into Hell W eek knowing I put myself the r e, that I
wanted to be ther e, and that I had all the tools I needed to
win this fuck ed - up  ga me, which gave me the passion to
persever e and claim ownership of the e xperience. It allowed
me to play h ar d, bend rules, and look for an edge  wher ever
and whenev er I could until the hor n sounded on F riday
af ter noon. T o me this was war, and the enemies wer e our
instructors w ho’d blatantly told us that they wanted to br eak
us down and mak e us q uit! Having their schedu le in our
heads would  help us whi ttle the time down by m emorizing
what c ame ne xt, and mor e than that, it would gif t us a
victory going in. Which would give us something to latch
onto during Hell W eek when those motherfuck ers wer e
beating us  down.
“Y o man, I’m not playing,” I said. “W e need that  schedule!”I could  see K enny Bigbee , the only other black man in Class
231, raise an eyebr ow fr om acr oss the r oom. He’d been in
my ﬁrst BUD/S class, and  got injur ed just befor e H ell W eek.
Now he was back for seconds too . “ Oh shit,” he said. “ David
Goggins is back on the  log.”
K enny smiled wide and I d oubled over laughing. He’d been in
the instructors’ oﬃce listening in when the doctors wer e
trying to pull me out of m y ﬁrst Hell W eek. It was during a
log PT evolution. Our boa t cr ews wer e car rying logs as a unit
up and down the beach, soak ed, salty, and sandy as shit. I
was running with a log on my shoulders, vomiting blood.
Bloody snot str eamed fr om my nose and mouth, and the
instructors periodically grabbed me and sat me down nearby
because they thought I might dr op fucking dead. But every
time th ey tur ned ar ound I was back in the mix. Back on that
log.
K enny k ept hearing the same r efrain over the radio that
night. “W e need to get Goggins out of ther e,” one voice  said.
“ R oger that, sir . Goggins is sitting down,” another voice
crackled. Then af ter a beat, K enny would hear that radio
chirp a gain. “ Oh shit, Goggins is back on the log. I r epeat,
Goggins is back on the  log!”
K enny loved telling that s tory . A t 5’10” and 170 p ounds, he
was sm aller than I was a nd wasn’t on our boat c r ew, but I
knew we could trust him. In fact, ther e was nobody  better for
the job . During Class 231, K enny was tapped to k eep the
instructors’ o ﬃce clean and tidy, which meant that he had
access. That night, he tiptoed into enemy ter ritory, liberated
the schedule  fr om a ﬁle,  made a copy, and slipp ed it back
into position befor e anyo ne ever knew it was missing. Just
lik e that we had our ﬁrst victory befor e the biggest mind
game of our lives had even  begun.Of c ourse, knowing some thing is coming is only a small part
of the battle.  Because tortur e is tortur e, and in Hell W eek the
only way to get to past it is to go thr ough it. W ith a look or a
few w or ds, I made sur e our guys wer e putting out at all
times. When we stood on the beach holding our boat
over head, or running logs up and down that motherfuck er,
we we nt har d, and during surf tortur e I hummed the saddest
and most epic song fr om Platoon, while we waded into the
P aciﬁc  Ocean.
I’ve always found inspiration in ﬁlm. R ock y helped motivate
me to achieve my dr eam of being invited to SEAL training,
but Platoon  would help me and my cr ew ﬁnd an edge during
the dark nights of Hell W eek, when the instructors wer e
mocking our pain, telling us how sor ry we wer e, and sending
us into the head - high  surf over and over again. Adagio in
Strings  was the scor e to one of my favorite scenes in Plato on
and with bone - chilling  f og  wr apping all ar ound u s, I str etched
my ar ms out lik e Elias wh en he was getting gunned down by
the V iet Cong, and sang my ass oﬀ. W e’d all watched that
movie together during F ir st Phase, and my antics had a dual
eﬀect of pissing oﬀ the instructors and ﬁring up my cr ew .
F inding moments of laughter in the pain and delirium tur ned
the entir e melodramatic e xperience upside down for us. It
gave us some contr ol of our emotions. Again, this was all a
mind game, and I damn sur e wasn’t going to  lose.
But the most important games within the game wer e the
races that the instructors  set up between boat cr ews. Damn
near everything in BUD/S was a competition. W e’d run boats
and logs up and down the  beach. W e had paddle r aces, and
we eve n did the damn O - Course  ca r rying a l og or a boa t
between obs tacles. W e’d car ry them while balancing on
nar r ow beams, over spinning logs, and acr oss r ope bridges.
W e’d s end it over the high  wall, and we dr opped it at the foot
of the thirty - foot - high  car go net while we climbed up andover th at damn thing. The winning team was almost always
r ewar ded with r est and the losing teams got e xtra beat
downs fr om P sycho P ete. They wer e or der ed to pe rfor m sets
of push - ups  and sit - ups  in  the wet sand, then  do ber m
sprints, their bodies quivering with e xhaustion, which felt lik e
failur e on top of failur e. P sycho let them know it too . He
laughed in their face as he hunted  quitters.
“Y ou a r e absolutely path etic,” he said. “I hope to God you
fucking quit because if they allow you in the ﬁeld you’r e
gonna get us all  killed!”
W atching him berate my classmates gave me a dual
sensation. I didn’t mind hi m doing his job, but he was a bully,
and I never li k ed bullies. He’d been coming at me har d since
I go t back to BUD/S, and early on I decided I would show him
that he couldn’t get to me. Between bouts of surf tortur e,
when most guys stand nu t to butt to transfer hea t, body to
body, I stood apart. Eve ryone else was shivering . I didn’t
even twitch, and I saw how much that bother ed  him.During Hell W eek
The one luxury we had d uring Hell W eek was chow . W e ate
lik e kings. W e’r e talking omelets, r oast chick en and potatoes,
steak, hot soup, pasta with meat sauce, all kinds of fruit,
br ownies, soda, coﬀee, and a lot mor e. The catch is we had
to run the m ile ther e and back, with that 200- pound  boat on
our he ads. I always lef t chow hall with a peanut butter
sandwich tuc k ed in my wet and sandy pock et to scarf on the
beach when the instructors wer en’t looking. One day af ter
lunch, P sycho  decided to give us a bit mor e than a mile. It
became obvious at the quarter mile mark er, when he pick ed
up his pace, that he was n’t taking us dir ectly back to the
Grinder .
“Y ou boys better k eep th e fuck up!” he yelled, as  one boat
cr ew fell back. I check ed my  guys.
“W e ar e staying on this motherfuck er! F uck  him!”“ R oger that,” said F r eak Br own. T rue to his wor d, he’d been
with m e on the fr ont of that boat—the two heavies t points—
since Sunday night, and he was only getting  str onger .
P sycho str etc hed us out o n the sof t sand for mor e  than four
miles. He tried lik e hell to lose us, too, but we wer e his
shadow . He switched up the cadence. One minute he was
sprinting, then he wa s cr ouching down, wide - legged ,
grabbing his nuts and doin g elephant walks, then he loped at
a jogger’s pace befor e br eaking into another wind sprint
down the beach. By then the closest boat was a quarter mile
behind, but we wer e clipping his damn heels. W e mimick ed
his every step and r efused to let our bully gain any
satisfaction at our e xpense. He may have smok ed everybody
else but he did not smok e Boat Cr ew  T wo!
Hell W eek is the devil’s opera, and it builds lik e a c r escendo,
peaking in tor ment on W ednesday and staying right ther e
until they call it on F riday  af ter noon. By W ednesda y we wer e
all b r ok e dick, chafed to holy Hell. Our whole body  was one
big raspber ry, oozing puss and blood. Mentally we wer e
zombies. The  instructors had us doing simple boat raises and
we wer e all dragging. Ev en my cr ew could bar ely lif t that
boat. Meanwhile, P sycho and SB G and the other instructors
k ept close watch, looking for weaknesses as  always.
I had a r eal hate for the  instructors. They wer e my enemy
and I was ti r ed of them trying to bur r ow into my brain. I
glanced at Br own, and fo r the ﬁrst time all week he look ed
shak y . The whole cr ew did. Shit, I felt miserable too . My knee
was th e size of a grapefruit and every step I took to r ched my
nerves, whic h is why I was sear ching for something to fuel
me. I lock ed in on P sycho P ete. I was sick of that
motherfuck er . The instructors look ed composed and
comfortable. W e wer e desperate, and they had what weneeded: ener gy! It was time to ﬂip the game and own r eal
estate in their  heads.
When they clock ed out that night and dr ove home af ter a
pussy - ass  e ight hour s hif t while we wer e still going har d, I
wanted them thinking about Boat Cr ew T wo . I wanted to
haunt them when they s lipped into bed with their wives. I
wanted to occupy so much space in their minds that they
couldn’t even  get it up. T o me that would be as po werful as
putting a knife in their dick. So I deployed a pr ocess that I
now call “T aking  Souls.”
I tur ned to Br own. “Y ou know why I call you F r eak?” I ask ed.
He look ed over as we lo wer ed the boat, then lif ted it up
over head lik e cr eak y r obots on r eserve battery power .
“ Because you ar e one of the baddest men I’ve ever seen in
my damn life!” He crack ed a smile. “ And you know what I say
to thes e motherfuck ers rig ht her e?” I tipped my elbow at the
nine instructors gather ed on the beach, drinking coﬀee and
talking bullshit. “I say, they can go fuck themselves!” Bill
nodded and nar r owed hi s eyes on our tor mentors, while I
tur ned to the r est of the cr ew . “Now let’s thr ow this shit up
high and show them who we  ar e!”
“ F ucking beautiful,” Bill said. “ L et’s do  it!”
W ithin seconds my whole team had life. W e didn’t j ust lif t the
boat ov er head and set it d own har d, we thr ew it up , caught it
over head, tapped the sand with it and thr ew it up high again.
The r esults wer e immediate and undeniable. Our pain and
e xhaustion faded. Each r ep made us str onger and faster, and
each time we thr ew the boat up we all  chanted.
“Y OU CAN’T HUR T B O A T CREW  TWO!”
That was our fuck you  to the instructors, and w e had their
full attention  as we soar ed on a second wind. On thetoughest day  of the har d est week in the world’s toughest
training, Boat Cr ew T wo was moving at lightning speed and
making a mock ery of Hell W eek. The look on the instructors’
faces told a story . Their mouths hung open lik e they wer e
witnessing something nobody had ever seen befor e. Some
averted their  eyes, almost embar rassed. Only SB G look ed
satisﬁed.
* * *
Since that night in Hell W eek, I’ve deployed the T aking Souls
concept coun tless times.  T aking Souls is a tick et to ﬁnding
your own r eserve power and riding a second wind. It’s the
tool yo u can call upon to  win any competition or over come
every life obstacle. Y ou can utilize it to win a chess match, or
conquer an adversary in a  game of oﬃce politics. It can help
you r ock a jo b interview or e x cel at school. And yes , it can be
used to conquer all manner of physical challenges, but
r emember, t his is a gam e you ar e playing within yourself .
Unless you’r e engaged in physical competition , I’m not
suggesting th at you try to dominate someone or crush their
spirit. In fact, they never even need to know you’r e playing
this ga me. This is a tactic  for you to be your best w hen duty
calls. It’s a mind game you’r e playing on  yourself .
T aking some one’s soul means you’ve gained a tactical
advantage. Life is all about looking for tactical advantages,
which is why we stole the Hell W eek schedule, why we
nipped P sycho’s heels on that run, and why I made a show of
myself in the surf, hummi ng the Platoon  theme song. Each of
those incidents was an act of deﬁance that empower ed  us.
But deﬁance isn’t always  the best way to tak e someone’s
soul. It all d epends upon your ter rain. During B UD/S, the
instructors di dn’t mind if y ou look ed for advantages  lik e that.
They r espected it as long as you wer e also kicking ass. Y oumust do your own homework. Know the ter rain you’r e
operating in, when and wher e you can push boundaries, and
when you should fall in  line.
Ne xt, tak e inventory of y our mind and body on t he eve of
battle. List out your insecurities and weakness, as well as
your opponent’s. F or instance, if you’r e getting bullied, and
you know wher e you fall short or feel insecur e, you  can stay
ahead of any insults or b arbs a bully may thr ow your way .
Y ou can laugh at yourself along with them, which
disempowers them. If yo u tak e what they do or say less
personally, th ey no longer hold any car ds. F eelings ar e just
feelings. On the other hand, people who ar e secur e with
themselves don’t bully ot her people. They look out for other
people, so if you’r e getting bullied you know that you’r e
dealing with someone who has pr oblem ar eas you can
e xploit or soothe. Someti mes the best way to defeat a bully
is to actually help them. If you can think two or thr ee moves
ahead, you will commandeer their thought pr ocess, and if
you do that, you’ve tak en  their damn soul without t hem even
r ealizing  it.
Our SEAL instructors wer e  our bullies, and they didn’t r ealize
the ga mes I was playing during that week to k eep Boat Cr ew
T wo sh arp. And they didn’t have to . I imagined that they
wer e o bsessed with our e xploits during Hell W eek, but I don’t
know that for sur e. It was a ploy I used to maintain my
mental edge and help our cr ew  pr evail.
In the same way, if you ar e up against a competitor for a
pr omotion, a nd you know wher e you fall short, you can
shape up your game ahe ad of your interview or e valuation.
In that scenario, laughing at your weaknesses won’t solve
the pr oblem.  Y ou must master them. In the meantime, if you
ar e awar e of your competitor’s vulnerabilities you can spin
those to your advantage, but all of that tak es r esear ch.Again, know the ter rain, know yourself, and you’d better
know your adversary in  detail.
Once y ou’r e in the heat o f battle, it comes down to staying
power . If it’s a diﬃcult physical challenge you will pr obably
have to defeat your own  demons befor e you can tak e your
opponent’s soul. That m eans r ehearsing answers to the
simple quest ion that is sur e to rise up lik e a thought bubble:
“Why am I h er e?” If you know that moment is co ming and
have y our answer r eady,  you will be equipped to mak e the
split second - decision  to ignor e your weak ened mind and
k eep moving. Know why  you’r e in the ﬁght to stay in the
ﬁght!
And never for get that all  emotional and physical anguish is
ﬁnite! It all e nds eventually . Smile at pain and wat ch it fade
for at least a second or two . If you can do that , you can
string those seconds together and last longer than your
opponent thi nks you can, and that may be enough to catch a
second wind. Ther e is no scientiﬁc consensus on second
wind. Some scientists think it’s the r esult of endorphins
ﬂooding you r nervous system, others think it’s a burst of
o xygen that can help br e ak down lactic acid, as w ell as the
glycogen and triglycerides muscles need to perfo r m. Some
say its  pur ely  psychologic al. All I know is that by going har d
when w e felt defeated we wer e able to ride a second wind
thr ough the worst night in Hell W eek. And once you have
that second  wind behind you it’s easy to br eak your
opponent dow n and snatch a soul. The har d part is getting to
that point, because the tic k et to victory of ten comes down to
bringing your very best when you feel your  worst.
* * *
A f ter r ocking  boat pr esses, the whole class was gif ted an
hour o f sleep in a big gr een ar my tent they’d set up on thebeach and outﬁtted with military cots. Those moth erfuck ers
had no mattr esses, but may as well have been  a cotton
topped cloud  of luxury because once we wer e horizontal we
all went  limp.
Oh, bu t P syc ho wasn’t done with me. He let me sleep for a
solitary minute, then wok e me up and led me back onto the
beach for some one - on - one  t ime. He saw an opportunity to
get in my head, at last, and I was disoriented as I stagger ed
towar d the water all alone, but the cold wok e me the fuck
up. I decided to savor my e xtra hour of private surf tortur e.
When the water was chest high I began humming Adagio in
Strings  once mor e. L ouder this time. L oud enough for that
motherfuck er to hear me over the crash of the surf . That
song gave me  life!
I’d come to SEAL training to see if I was har d enough to
belong and found an inn er beast within that I ne ver knew
e xisted. A beast that I wo uld tap into fr om then on whenever
life went wr ong. By the time I emer ged fr om tha t ocean, I
consider ed myself  unbr eak able.
If  only .
Hell W eek tak es its toll o n everybody, and later that night,
with forty - eight  ho urs to go, I went to m ed check to get a
T oradol shot in my knee to bring the swelling down. By the
time I was back on the beach, the boat cr ews wer e out at sea
in the midst of a paddling drill. The surf was pounding, the
wind swirling . P sycho look ed over at SB G. “What the fuck ar e
we gonna do with  him?”
F or the  ﬁrst time, he was hesitant, and tir ed of trying to beat
me do wn. I was good to  go, r eady for any challenge, but
P sycho was over it. He was r eady to give my ass a spa
vacation. That’s when I knew I’d outlasted him; that I had hissoul. SB G had other ideas. He handed me a life jack et and
attached a chem light to the back of my  hat.
“ F ollow me,”  he said as he char ged up the beach. I caught
up and  we ran north for a good mile. By then we co uld bar ely
see the  boats and their b obbing lights thr ough the mist and
over th e waves. “ All right, Goggins. Now go swim out and
ﬁnd your fucking  boat!”
He’d landed a hollow poin t on my deepest insecurity, pier ced
my con ﬁdence, and I was stunned silent. I gave him a look
that sa id, “ Ar e you fucking kidding me?” I was a decent
swimmer by then, and su rf tortur e didn’t scar e me because
we wer en’t that far fr om shor e, but an open water,
hypother mic swim a thousand yar ds oﬀ shor e in a stor m, to a
boat th at had  no fucking idea I was heading their way? That
sounded lik e a death sentence, and I hadn’t pr epar ed for
anything lik e it. But sometimes the une xpected descends lik e
chaos, and without war nin g even the bravest among us must
be r eady to tak e on risks  and tasks that seem b eyond our
capabilities.
F or me, in th at moment, it came down to how I wanted to be
r emember ed. I could have r efused the or der, and I wouldn’t
have g otten in tr ouble because I had no swim budd y (in SEAL
training you always have to be with a swim buddy), and it
was obvious that he was  asking me to do some thing that
was e xtr emely unsafe. B ut I also knew that my objective
coming into SEAL training was mor e than making it thr ough
to the  other side with a T rident. F or me it was the
opportunity to go up against the best of the best and
distance myself fr om the pack. So even though I couldn’t see
the bo ats out past the thrashing waves ther e was no time to
dwell on fear . Ther e was no choice to mak e at  all.
“What ar e you waiting on Goggins? Get your fucking ass out
ther e, and do not fuck this  up!”“ R oger that!”  I shouted and sprinted into the su rf . T r ouble
was, strapped with a buoyancy vest, nursing a wounded
knee, wearin g boots, I couldn’t swim for shit and it was
almost impos sible to duck dive thr ough the waves . I had to
ﬂail ov er the white wash, and with my mind managing so
many variables, the ocean seemed colder than ever . I
swallowed water by the gallon. It was as if the  sea was
prying open my jaws and ﬂooding my system, and with each
gulp, my fear  magniﬁed.
I ha d no ide a that back on land, SB G was pr eparing for a
worst - case  scenario r escue. I didn’t know he’d never put
another man in that position befor e. I didn’t r ealize that he
saw somethi ng special in me and lik e any str o ng leader
wanted to see how far I could tak e it, as he watche d my light
bob on the surface, nervous as hell. He told me all of that
during a r ecent conversation. A t the time I was just trying to
survive.
I ﬁnally made it thr ough the surf and swam another half - mile
oﬀ - shor e  on ly to r ealize I had six b oats bearing down on m y
head, teeter tottering in a nd out of view thanks to a four - foot
wind swell. They didn’t kn ow I was ther e! My light was faint,
and in the tr ench I couldn’t see a damn thing. I k e pt waiting
for one  of them to come bar r eling down fr om the peak of a
swell and mow me the fuck down. All I could do was bark into
the darkness lik e a hoarse sea  lion.
“ Boat Cr ew T wo! Boat Cr ew  T wo!”
It was a mino r miracle that my guys hear d me. They wheeled
our bo at ar ound, and F r eak Br own grabbed me with his big
ass ho oks an d hauled me in lik e a prized catch. I lay back in
the middle of the boat, m y eyes closed, and jackhammer ed
for the ﬁrst time all week. I was so cold I couldn’t hide  it.“ Damn, Goggins,” Br own said, “ you must be insane! Y ou
ok ay?” I nodded once an d got a hold of myself . I was the
leader of that cr ew and couldn’t allow myself  to show
weakness. I tensed every  muscle in my body, and my shiver
slowed to a stop in r eal  time.
“That’s how you lead fr o m the motherfucking fr on t,” I said,
coughing up saltwater lik e  a wounded bir d. I couldn’t k eep a
straight face for long. Neither could my cr ew . They knew
damn well that crazy - ass  swim wasn’t my  idea.
As the clock ran down on Hell W eek, we wer e in the demo
pit, just oﬀ Cor onado’s f amous Silver Strand. The pit was
ﬁlled w ith co ld mud and t opped oﬀ with icy water . Ther e was
a r ope  bridge—two separ ate lines, one for the feet and one
for the hands—str etching  acr oss it fr om end to end. One by
one, each man had to n avigate their way acr oss  while the
instructors sh ook the shit out of it, trying to mak e us fall. T o
maintain tha t kind of balance tak es tr emendous cor e
str ength, and  we wer e al l cook ed and at our wits end. Plus,
my kn ee was still fuck ed. In fact, it had gotten worse and
r equir ed a pain shot every twelve hours. But when my name
was c alled, I climbed onto that r ope, and when the
instructors went to work,  I ﬂe x ed my cor e and held on with
all I had  lef t.
Nine months  earlier, I had topped out at 297 po unds and
couldn’t even run a quarter mile. Back then, when I was
dr eaming of a diﬀer ent life, I r emember thinking that just
getting thr ough Hell W eek would be the biggest honor of my
life so far . Ev en if I neve r graduated fr om BUD/S, surviving
Hell W eek alone would have meant something. B ut I didn’t
just survive. I was about to ﬁnish Hell W eek at the top of my
class, and for the ﬁrst time, I knew I was a bad  motherfuck er .
Once, I was so focused on failing, I was afraid to even try .
Now I would tak e on any challenge. All my life, I was ter riﬁedof water, and especially cold water, but standing ther e in the
ﬁnal hour, I wished the ocean, wind, and mud wer e even
colder! I was completely transfor med physically, which was a
big part of my success in  BUD/S, but what saw m e thr ough
Hell W e ek wa s my mind, and I was just starting to tap into its
power .
That’s what I was thinkin g about as the instructors did their
best to thr ow me oﬀ that r ope bridge lik e a mechanical bull. I
hung t ough a nd got as far  as anyone else in Class 231 befor e
natur e won out and I w as sent spinning into the fr eezing
mud. I  wiped it fr om my  eyes and mouth and laughed lik e
mad a s F r eak  Br own helped me up. Not long af ter that, SB G
stepped to the edge of the  pit.
“ Hell W eek secur e!” He s houted to the thirty guys still lef t,
quivering in the shallows. All of us chafed and bleeding,
bloated and stiﬀ. “Y ou guys did an amazing  job!”
Some guys scr eamed with joy . Others collapsed to their
knees with tears in their eyes and thank ed God. I star ed into
the heavens too, pulled F r eak Br own in for a hug, and high -
ﬁved  my team. Every other boat cr ew had lost men, but not
Boat Cr ew T wo! W e lost no men and won every single  race!
W e co ntinued to celebra te as we boar ded a bus to the
Grinder . Onc e we ar rived, ther e was a lar ge pizza for each
guy along with a sixty - four - ounce  bottle of Gatorade and the
coveted br own t - shirt . Th at pizza tasted lik e m otherfucking
manna fr om heaven, but the shirts meant something mor e
signiﬁcant. W hen you ﬁrst ar rive at BUD/S you wear white t -
shirts  ev ery day . Once you su rvive Hell W eek, you get to
swap t hem out for br own shirts. It was a symbol that we’d
advanced to  a higher level, and af ter a lifetime of mostly
failur e, I deﬁnitely felt lik e I was someplace  new .I tried to enjoy the moment lik e everyone else, but my knee
hadn’t felt right in two days and I decided to leave and see
the me dics. O n my way o ﬀ the Grinder, I look ed to  my right
and sa w nea rly a hundr ed helmets lined up. They belonged
to the men who’d rung the bell, and they str etched past the
statue, all the way to the quarter deck. I r ead so me of the
names—guys who I lik ed. I knew how they felt beca use I was
ther e when my P arar escue class graduated without me. That
memory had dominated me for years, but af ter 130 hours of
Hell, it no longer deﬁned  me.
Every man was r equir ed to see the medics that evening, but
our bodies wer e so swolle n they had a har d time discer ning
injuries fr om general sor e ness. All I knew was my right knee
was th rice fuck ed and I ne eded crutches to get ar ound. F r eak
Br own lef t med check bruised and batter ed. K enny  came out
clean a nd ba r ely limped, but he was plenty sor e. T hankfully,
our ne xt evolution was w alk week. W e had seven days to
eat, drink, and heal up befor e shit got r eal once  again. It
wasn’t much , but enough time for most of the insane
motherfuck ers that managed to r emain in Class 2 31 to get
well.
Me, on the o ther hand? My swollen knee hadn’t gotten any
better by the time they  snatched my crutches away . But
ther e was no time for boo - hoo - ing . F irst Phase fun wasn’t
over y et. A f t er walk week came knot tying , which  may not
sound lik e much but was way worse than I e xpected because
that particular drill took place at the bottom of the pool,
wher e those same instru ctors would do their best to dr own
my one - legged  ass.
It was as if the Devil had been watching the wh ole show,
waited out inter mission, and now his favorite part was
coming right up. The night befor e BUD/S kick ed back up inintensity I could hear his wor ds ringing in my str essed - out
brain as I tossed and tur ned all night  long.
They s ay you like suﬀering, Goggins. That you think you’re a
bad motherfucker . Enjoy your extended stay in  Hell!C H A L L E N G E  # 4
Choose any competitive situation that you’r e in right now .
Who is  your opponent? Is it your teacher or coach, your
boss, a n unr uly client? No matter how they’r e tr eating you
ther e i s one way to not o nly ear n their r espect, but tur n the
tables. Ex cellence.
That m ay mean acing an e xam, or craf ting an ideal
pr oposal, or smashing a sales goal. Whatever it is, I want
you to  work har der on that pr oject or in that class than you
ever h ave befor e. Do everything e xactly as they ask, and
whatever sta ndar d they set as an ideal outcome, you should
be aiming to surpass  that.
If y our coach doesn’t give  you time in the games, dominate
practice. Check the best guy on your squad and show the
fuck out. That means put ting time in oﬀ the ﬁeld. W atching
ﬁlm s o you can study your opponent’s te ndencies,
memorizing plays, and training in the gym. Y ou need to
mak e that coach pay  attention.
If it ’s your t eacher, then start doing work of high quality .
Spend e xtra time on your assignments. W rite pape rs for her
that s he did n’t even assign! Come early to class. Ask
questions. P a y attention. Show her who you ar e and want to
be.
If it’s a boss, work ar ound the clock. Get to work befor e
them. L eave af ter they go home. Mak e sur e they see that
shit, a nd whe n it’s time t o deliver, surpass their maximum
e xpectations.Whoever you ’r e dealing with, your goal is to mak e them
watch you achieve what they could never have done
themselves. Y ou want them thinking how amazing you ar e.
T ak e th eir negativity and use it to dominate their task with
everything you’ve got. T ak e their motherfucking soul!
A f terwar d, post about it on social and add the hashtag
#canthurtme #takingsouls.C H A P T E R  F I V E
5 .  ARMORED MIND
“Y OUR  KNEE  L OOKS  PRET TY  BAD , G OGGINS .”
No fucking shit, doc. W ith two days to go in walk week, I’d
come by medical for a follow - up . Th e doctor r olled up my
camo pants and when he gave my right kneecap a gentle
squeeze, pai n seized my brain, but I couldn’t show  it. I was
playing a r ole. I was the beat up but otherwise healthy BUD/S
student r eady for the ﬁght, and I couldn’t so much as
grimace to pull it oﬀ. I a lr eady knew the knee was fuck ed,
and that the odds of getting thr ough another ﬁve months of
training on one leg wer e l ow, but accepting anothe r r oll back
meant endur ing another Hell W eek, and that was way too
much to  pr ocess.
“The swelling hasn’t gone down much. How’s it  feel?”
The do ctor was playing a r ole too . SEAL candidates had a
don’t ask, don’t tell agr ee ment with most of the me dical staﬀ
at Nav al Special W arfar e Command. I wasn’t abou t to mak e
the doctor’s job easier by  r evealing anything to him, and he
wasn’t gonna tak e cautio n’s side and pull the rip cor d on a
man’s dr eam. He lif ted his hand and my pain faded. I
coughed and pneumonia once again rattled in my l ungs until
I felt the cold truth of his stethoscope on my  skin.Ever since Hell W eek was  called, I’d been coughing up br own
knots o f muc us. F or the ﬁrst two days I lay in bed, day and
night, spitting them into a Gatorade bottle, wher e I stor ed
them lik e so many nick els. I could bar ely br eathe, and
couldn’t move much e ither . I may have been a bad
motherfuck er in Hell W eek, but that shit was over, and I had
to dea l with the fact tha t the Devil (and those instructors)
branded me  too .
“It’s all right, doc,” I said. “ A little stiﬀ is  all.”
T ime is  what I needed. I k new how to push thr ough pain, and
my body had almost always r esponded with perfor mance. I
wasn’t going to quit just because my knee was barking. It
would come ar ound eventually . The doc pr escribed  medicine
to r educe the congestion in my lungs and sinuses,  and gave
me some Motrin for my k nee. W ithin two days my br eathing
impr oved, but I still couldn’t bend my right  leg.
This would be a  pr oblem.
Of all the moments in BUD/S that I thought could br eak me, a
knot - tying  e x er cise never r egister ed on my radar . Then
again, this wasn’t the f ucking Boy Scouts. This was an
underwater knot - tying  drill held in the ﬁf teen - foot  section of
the po ol. And while the pool didn’t strik e mortal fe ar into me
lik e it once did, being negatively buoyant, I knew that any
pool evolution could be my undoing, especially those that
demanded tr eading  water .
Even b efor e H ell W eek, we’d been tested in the pool. W e had
to perf or m mock r escues  on the instructors and do a ﬁf ty -
meter  under water swim without ﬁns on a single br eath. T hat
swim s tarted with a giant stride into the water follo wed by a
full somersa ult to siphon oﬀ any momentum w hatsoever .
Then without  kicking oﬀ the side, we swam along the lane
lines to the end of our twenty - ﬁve - meter  pool. On the farside we wer e allowed to  kick oﬀ the wall then swim back.
When I ar rived at the ﬁf ty - meter  mark I r ose up and gasp ed
for air .  My heart hammer ed until my br eath smoothed, and I
grasped that I’d actually passed the ﬁrst of a series of
complicated underwater evolutions that wer e supposed to
teach us to be calm, co ol, and collected underwater on a
br eath  hold.
The knot - tying  evolut ion was ne xt in the series and it wasn’t
about our ability to tie various knots or a way to time our
max br eath hold. Sur e,  both skills come in handy on
amphibian operations, but this drill was mor e about our
capacity to juggle multiple str essors in an envir onment that’s
not sustaina ble for human life. Despite my health, I was
heading into the drill with some conﬁdence. Things changed
when I started tr eading  water .
That’s how the drill began, with eight students strung out
acr oss the pool, moving o ur hands and legs lik e eg g beaters.
That’s har d enough for m e on two good legs, bu t because
my right knee didn’t work, I was for ced to tr ead water with
just my lef t. That spik ed  the degr ee of diﬃculty, and my
heart rate, which sapped my  ener gy .
Each student had an instructor assigned to them for this
evolution and P sycho P ete speciﬁcally r equested me. It was
obvious I was struggling, and P sycho, and his bruised pride,
wer e hungry for a little pa yback. W ith each r evolu tion of my
right leg, shockwaves of pain e xploded lik e ﬁr eworks. Even
with P sycho eyeballing me, I couldn’t hide it. When I
grimaced, he smiled lik e a kid on Christmas  mor ning.
“T ie a squar e knot! The n a bowline!” He shouted. I was
working so har d it was diﬃcult to catch my br eath, but
P sycho didn’t give two fucks. “Now, dammit!” I gulped air,
bent fr om the waist and kick ed  down.Ther e wer e ﬁve knots in th e drill altogether and each student
was told to g rab their eight - inch  s lice of r ope, and tie the m
oﬀ one at a time at the bottom of the pool. W e we r e allotted
a br ea th in between, but could do as many as all ﬁve knots
on a single b r eath. The instructor called out the knots, but
the pacing was up to each student. W e wer en’t allowed to
use a mask or goggles to complete the evolution, and the
instructor had to appr ove each knot with a thumbs up befor e
we wer e per mitted to surface. If they ﬂashed a thumb down
instead, we had to r e - tie  th at knot c or r ectly, an d if we
surfaced befor e a given knot was appr oved, that meant
failur e and a tick et  home.
Once back at the surface , ther e was no r esting o r r elaxing
between tas ks. T r eading  water was the constant r efrain,
which meant soaring heart rates and the continual bur ning
up of o xygen in the bloodstr eam for the one - legged  man.
T ranslation: the dives w er e uncomfortable as hell, and
blacking out was a r eal  possibility .
P sycho glar ed  at me thr ou gh his mask as I work ed my knots.
A f ter about thirty seconds he’d appr oved both and we
surfaced. He br eathed fr e e and easy, but I was gasping and
panting lik e a wet, tir ed dog. The pain in my knee was so bad
I f elt sweat b ead up on m y for ehead. When you’r e sweating
in an unheated pool, you know shit’s fuck ed up. I was
br eathless, low on ener gy, and wanted to quit, but quitting
this evolution meant quitting BUD/S altogether, and that
wasn’t  happening.
“ Oh no , ar e you hurt, Goggins? Do you have som e sand in
your p ussy?” P sycho ask ed. “I’ll bet you can’t do the last
thr ee knots on one  br eath.”
He said it with a smirk, lik e he was daring me. I knew the
rules. I didn’t have to ac cept his challenge, but that would
have m ade P sycho just a little too happy and I couldn’t allowthat. I  nodded and k ept tr eading water, delaying  my dive
until m y pulse evened out and I could scor e one deep,
nourishing b r eath. P sycho wasn’t having it. Whenever I
opened my mouth he spla shed water in my face to str ess me
out even mor e, a tactic used when trainees started to panic.
That made br eathing  impossible.
“ Go under now or you  fail!”
I’d run out o f time. I tried  to gulp some air befor e my duck
dive, and tasted a mouthf ul of P sycho’s splash water instead
as I dove to  the bottom of the pool on a negati ve br eath
hold. My lungs wer e damn  near empty which meant I was in
pain fr om the jump, but I  knock ed the ﬁrst one ou t in a few
seconds. P sycho took his sweet time e xamining my work. My
heart was thrumming lik e high alert Morse code. I felt it ﬂip
ﬂop in  my chest, lik e it w as trying to br eak thr ough my rib
cage a nd ﬂy to fr eedom. P sycho star ed at the twine, ﬂipped
it over  and perused it with his eyes and ﬁngers, befor e
oﬀering a thumb’s up in slow motion. I shook my head,
untied the r ope and hit the ne xt one. Again he gave it a close
inspection while my chest bur ned and diaphragm contracted,
trying to for ce air into my empty lungs. The pain level in my
knee was at a ten. Stars  gather ed in my peripheral vision.
Those multip le str essors had me teetering lik e a Jenga tower,
and I felt lik e  I was about to black out. If that hap pened, I’d
have t o depend on P sycho to swim me to the surface and
bring m e ar o und. Did I r e ally trust this man to do  that? He
hated me. What if he failed to e x ecute? What if my body was
too bur ned - out  that even a r escue br eath couldn’t r ouse  me?
My mi nd was spun with those simple to xic questions that
never go away . Why was I her e? Why suﬀer when I could quit
and be comfortable again? Why risk passing out or even
death for a fu cking knot drill? I knew that if I succu mbed and
bolted to the surface my S EAL car eer would have ended thenand ther e, but in that m oment I couldn’t ﬁgur e out why I
ever gave a  fuck.
I look e d over  at P sycho . H e held both thumbs up and sported
a big goof y smile on his face lik e he was watching a damn
comedy sho w . His split second of pleasur e in my pain,
r eminded m e of all the bullying and taunts I felt as a
teenager, but instead of playing the victim and letting
negative emotions sap my ener gy and for ce m e to the
surface, a failur e, it was as if a new light blazed in my brain
that allowed me to ﬂip the  script.
T ime stood still as I r ealized for the ﬁrst time that I’d always
look ed at my entir e life, everything I’d been thr ough, fr om
the wr o ng perspective. Y es, all the abuse I’d e xperienced and
the negativity I had to push thr ough challenged me to the
cor e, b ut in that moment I stopped seeing myself as the
victim of bad cir cumstanc e, and saw my life as the ultimate
training gr ound instead. My disadvantages had been
callousing my mind all along and had pr epar ed me for that
moment in that pool with P sycho  P ete.
I r emember my very ﬁrst day in the gym back in Indiana. My
palms wer e sof t and quick ly got tor n up on the bars because
they wer en’t accustomed to gripping steel. But over time,
af ter thousan ds of r eps, my palms built up a thick callous as
pr otection. The same principle works when it comes to
mindset. Un til you e xperience har dships lik e abuse and
bullying, failur es and disa ppointments, your mind w ill r emain
sof t a nd e xposed. Life  e xperience, especially negative
e xperiences, help callous the mind. But it’s up to you wher e
that callous lines up. If you choose to see yourself as a victim
of cir cumsta nce into adulthood, that callous wi ll become
r esentment that pr otects you fr om the unfamiliar . It will
mak e you too cautious and untrusting, and possibly too
angry at the world. It will mak e you fearful of change andhar d to  r each , but not har d of mind. That’s wher e I was as a
teenager, but af ter my second Hell W eek, I’d become
someone new . I’d fought thr ough so many hor rible situations
by the n and r emained ope n and r eady for mor e. My ability to
stay open r epr esented a willingness to ﬁght for my own life,
which allowe d me to withstand hail stor ms of pain and use it
to c allous over my victim’s mentality . That shit was gone,
buried under layers of sweat and har d fucking ﬂesh, and I
was starting to callous over my fears too . That r ealization
gave me the mental edg e I needed to outlast P s ycho P ete
one mor e  time.
T o s how him he couldn’t h urt me anymor e I smiled back, and
the feeling of being on the edge of a black out went away .
Suddenly, I was ener gized. The pain faded and I felt lik e I
could s tay un der all day . P sycho saw that in my eyes. I tied
oﬀ the last k not at leisur ely pace, glaring at him the whole
time. H e ges tur ed with his hands for me to hur ry  up as his
diaphragm contracted. I ﬁ nally ﬁnished, he gave me a quick
aﬃr mative and kick ed to the surface, desperate for a br eath.
I took my time, joined him topside and found him gasping,
while I  felt strangely r elax ed. When the chips wer e down at
the pool during Air F or ce parar escue training, I’d buckled.
This ti me I won a major  battle in the water . It was a big
victory, but the war wasn’t  over .
A f ter I passed the knot - tying  evolution, we had two minutes
to clim b out on to the de ck, get dr essed, and head back to
the classr oom. During F irst Phase, that’s usually plenty of
time, but a lot of us—no t just me—wer e still healing fr om
Hell W eek and not moving at our typical lightning pace. On
top of that, o nce we got thr ough Hell W eek, Class  231 went
thr ough a bit of an attitude  adjustment.
Hell W eek is designed to show you that a human is capable
of m uch mor e than you know . It opens your mind to the truepossibilities of human potential, and with that comes a
change in your mentality . Y ou no longer fear cold  water or
doing push - ups  all da y . Y ou r ealize that no matter what they
do to you, they will never br eak you, so you don’t rush as
much to mak e their arb itrary deadlines. Y ou know if you
don’t m ak e i t, the instructors will beat you down. Meaning
push - ups , ge tting wet and sandy, anything to up the pain
and discomfort quotient, but for those of us knuckle draggers
still in the mix, our attitude was, So the fuck be it!  None of us
fear ed the instructors anymor e, and we wer en’t about to
rush. They didn’t lik e that one damn  bit.
I ha d seen a lot of beat downs while at BUD/S, bu t the one
we r eceived that day wi ll go down as one of the worst in
history . W e did push - ups  until we couldn’t pick ourselves up
oﬀ the  deck, then they tur ned us on our backs and
demanded ﬂutter kicks. E ach kick was tortur e for me. I k ept
putting my legs down because of the pain. I was showing
weakness and if you show weakness, IT IS  ON!
P sycho and SB G descend ed and took tur ns on m e. I went
fr om push - ups  to ﬂutter kicks to bear crawls until they  got
tir ed. I could feel the moving parts of my knee shif ting,
ﬂoating, and  grabbing every time I bent it to do t hose bear
crawls, and it was agonizing. I moved slower than nor mal
and knew I was br ok en. That simple question bubbled up
again. Why? What was I trying to pr ove? Quitting seemed the
sane choice. The comfort of mediocrity sounded lik e sweet
r elief until P sycho scr eamed in my  ear .
“Move faster, motherfuck er!”
Once a gain, an amazing feeling washed over me . I wasn’t
focused on outdoing him this time. I was in the wo rst pain of
my life , but my victory in the pool minutes befor e came
rushing back. I’d ﬁnally pr oved to myself that I was  a decent
enough water man to belong in the Navy SEALs. Heady stuﬀfor a negatively buoyant k id that never took a swim  lesson in
his ent ir e life . And the r ea son I got ther e was becau se I’d put
in the work. The pool had been my kryptonite. Even though I
was a far better swimmer  as a SEAL candidate, I was still so
str essed about water evolutions that I used to hit the pool
af ter a day of training at least thr ee times a week. I scaled
the ﬁf teen - foot  f ence  just to gain af ter - hours  access. Other
than th e academic aspect, nothing scar ed me as much about
the pr ospect s of BUD/S lik e the swimming drills, and by
dedicating tim e I was able to callous over that fear and hit
new levels underwater when the pr essur e was  on.
I t houg ht about the incr edible power of a calloused mind on
task, as P sycho and SB G  beat me down, and tha t thought
became a feeling that took over my body and made me
move as fast as a bear a r ound that pool. I couldn’t believe
what I  was doing. The intense pain was gone, an d so wer e
those n agging questions. I was putting out har der than ever,
br eaking thr ough the limitations of injury and pain tolerance,
and riding a second wind deliver ed by a calloused  mind.
A f ter th e bea r crawls, I we nt back to doing ﬂutter k icks, and I
still had no pain! As we wer e leaving the pool a  half - hour
later, SB G ask ed, “ Goggin s, what got into your as s to mak e
you Super man?”  I jus t s miled and lef t the pool. I didn’t want
to s ay anything because I didn’t yet understand w hat I now
know .
Similar to using an opponent’s ener gy to gain an a dvantage,
leaning on your calloused  mind in the heat of battle can shif t
your t hinking as well. R emembering what you’ve been
thr ough and how that has str engthened your mindset can lif t
you ou t of a negative brain loop and help you bypass those
weak, one - second  impulses to give in so you can power
thr ough obstacles. And when you leverage a calloused mind
lik e I did ar ou nd the pool that day and k eep ﬁghting thr oughpain, it can h elp you push your limits because if y ou accept
the pain as a natural pr ocess and r efuse to give in and give
up, you will engage the sympathetic nervous system which
shif ts your hor monal  ﬂow .
The sympathetic nervous system is your ﬁght or ﬂi ght r eﬂe x.
It’s bubbling just below t he surface, and when you ar e lost,
str essed out,  or struggling, lik e I was when I was a down and
out kid, that’s the part o f your mind that’s driving the bus.
W e’ve all tasted this feeling befor e. Those mor nings when
going on a run is the last thing you want to do,  but then
twenty minutes into it you feel ener gized, that’s the work of
the sympathetic nervous system. What I’ve found i s that you
can tap into it on - call  as long as you know how to manage
your own  mind.
When you indulge in negative self - talk , the gif ts of a
sympathetic r esponse will r emain out of r each. However, if
you ca n manage those moments of pain that come with
maximum eﬀ ort, by r emembering what you’ve been thr ough
to get to that point in your life, you will be in  a better
position to persever e and choose ﬁght over ﬂight . That will
allow you to use the adr enaline that come s with a
sympathetic r esponse to go even  har der .
Obstacles at work and school can also be over come with
your ca lloused mind. In those cases, pushing thr oug h a given
ﬂashpoint isn’t lik ely to lead to a sympathetic r esponse, but
it w ill k eep y ou motivated to push thr ough any doubt you
feel ab out your own abilities. No matter the task at hand,
ther e is always opportun ity for self - doubt . Whenever you
decide to follow a dr eam or set a goal, you ar e just as lik ely
to com e up with all the r e asons why the lik elihood of success
is low . Blame  it on the fuck ed - up  evolutionary wiring of the
human mind. But you don’t have to let your doubt into the
cockpit! Y ou can tolerate doubt as a backseat driver, but ifyou put doubt in the p ilot’s seat, defeat is guaranteed.
R emembering that you’ve been thr ough diﬃculties befor e
and have always survived to ﬁght again shif ts the
conversation in your hea d. It will allow you to contr ol and
manage doubt, and k eep  you focused on taking each and
every step necessary to achieve the task at  hand.
Sounds simp le, right? It isn’t. V ery few people even bother to
try to contr ol the way the ir thoughts and doubts bubble up.
The vast majority of us a r e slaves to our minds. M ost don’t
even m ak e the ﬁrst eﬀort when it comes to mastering their
thought pr ocess because it’s a never - ending  chor e and
impossible to get right every time. The average person
thinks 2,000–3,000 thoughts per hour . That’s thirty to ﬁf ty
per minute! Some of those shots will slip by the goalie. It’s
inevitable. Especially if you coast thr ough  life.
Physical trai ning is the perfect crucible to lear n how to
manage your thought pr o cess because when you’r e working
out, yo ur focus is mor e lik ely to be single pointed,  and your
r esponse to str ess and pain is immediate and measurable.
Do you  hammer har d and snag that personal best lik e you
said you would, or do y ou crumble? That decision rar ely
comes down to physical ability, it’s almost always a test of
how w ell you ar e managing your own mind. If you push
yourself thr ough each split and use that ener gy to maintain a
str ong pace, you have a gr eat chance of r ecor ding a faster
time. Granted, some days it’s easier to do that than others.
And the clock, or the scor e, doesn’t matter anyway . The
r eason it’s important to p ush har dest when you want to quit
the mo st is because it he lps you callous your mind. It’s the
same r eason why you have to do your best work when you
ar e the least motivated. T hat’s why I loved PT in BUD/S and
why I still love it today . Physical challenges str engthen my
mind so I’m r eady for whatever life thr ows at me, and it will
do the same for  you.But no matter how well you deploy it, a calloused mind can’t
heal br ok en bones. On th e mile - long  hik e back to  the BUD/S
compound, th e feeling of victory evaporated, and I could feel
the damage I’d done. I had twenty weeks of trainin g in fr ont
of me,  dozens of evolutions ahead, and I could bar ely walk.
While I wanted to deny the pain in my knee, I knew I was
fuck ed so I limped straight to  medical.
When he saw my knee, the doc didn’t say a damn thing. He
just sh ook his head and sent me to get an x - ray  that
r evealed a fractur ed kneecap. In BUD/S when r eservists
sustain injuri es that tak e a long time to heal, th ey’r e sent
home, and that’s what happened to  me.
I cr utched my ass back to the bar racks, demoralized, and
while c hecking out, I saw some of the guys that quit during
Hell W eek. When I ﬁrst  glimpsed their helmets lined up
beneath the bell, I felt sor ry for them because I knew the
empty feeling of giving up, but seeing them face to face
r eminded me  that failur e is a part of life and now we all had
to pr ess  on.
I hadn’t quit, so I knew I’d be invited back, but I had no idea
if th at meant a thir d Hell W eek or not. Or if af t er getting
r olled twice I still had th e bur ning desir e to ﬁght thr ough
another hur ricane of pain with no guarantee of success.
Given my injury r ecor d,  how could I? I lef t the BUD/S
compound with mor e self awar eness and mor e mastery over
my min d tha n I’d ever ha d befor e, but my futur e w as just as
uncertain.
* * *
Airplanes have always made me claustr ophobic, so I decided
to t ak e the train fr om San  Diego to Chicago, which gave me
thr ee f ull day s to think, a nd my mind was all fuck ed up. Onthe ﬁrs t day I didn’t know  if I wanted to be a SEAL anymor e. I
had ov er come a lot. I bea t Hell W eek, r ealized the p ower of a
calloused min d and conquer ed my fear of the water . P er haps
I’d alr e ady lear ned enough about myself? What else did I
need to pr ove? On day two I thought about all the other jobs
I could sign up for . Maybe I should move on and become a
ﬁr eﬁghter? That’s a bad - ass  job, and it would be an
opportunity to become a diﬀer ent sort of her o . But on day
thr ee, as the train veer ed into Chicago, I slipped into a
bathr oom the  size of a phone booth and check ed in with the
A ccountability Mir r or . Is that really how you feel? Are you
sure you’re ready to give up on the SEALs and become a
civilian ﬁreman?  I star e d at myself for ﬁve minutes befor e I
shook my head. I couldn’ t lie. I had to tell myself the truth,
out  loud.
“I’m afraid. I’m afraid of g oing thr ough all of that s hit again.
I’m afraid of day one, week  one.”
I wa s divor ced by then, b ut my e x - wife , P a m, met m e at the
train station  to drive me home to my mother’s place in
Indianapolis. P am was still living in Brazil. W e’d been in touch
while I was in San Die go, and af ter seeing each other
thr ough the cr owd on the  train platfor m, we fell back on our
habits, and later that night we fell into  bed.
That w hole summer, fr om  May to November, I stayed in the
Midwest, healing up then r ehabbing my knee. I was still a
r eservist but r emained undecided about going back to Navy
SEAL training . I look ed into the Marine Corps. I e x plor ed the
application pr ocess for a handful of ﬁr e ﬁghting units but
ﬁnally pick ed up the phone, r eady to call into the BUD/S
compound. They needed my ﬁnal  answer .
I sat ther e, holding the telephone, and thought about the
misery of SEAL training. Shit, you run six miles a day just to
eat, not including your training runs. I visualized all theswimming and paddling, car rying heavy - ass  boats and logs
on our  heads , over the b er m all day . I ﬂashed ont o hours of
sit - ups , push - ups , ﬂ utter kicks, and t he O - Course . I
r emember ed the feeling of r olling ar ound in the  sand, of
being chafed  all fucking day and night. My memories wer e a
mind - body  e xper ience, and I felt the  cold deep in my bones.
A n or mal person would g ive up. They’d say, fuck it, it’s just
not meant to be, and r efuse to tortur e thems elves one
minute  mor e.
But I wasn’t wir ed  nor mal.
As I dialed the number, negativity r ose up lik e an angry
shadow . I couldn’t help bu t think that I was put on this earth
to s uﬀer . Why wouldn’t my own personal demons, the fates,
God, or Satan, just leave me the fuck alone? I was tir ed of
trying to pr ove myself . T ir ed of callousing my mind. Mentally,
I was wor n to the nub. A t the same time, being wor n the fuck
down is the price of being har d and I knew if I quit, those
feelings and thoughts wouldn’t just go away . Th e cost of
quitting wou ld be lifelong pur gatory . I’d be trapped in the
knowing that  I didn’t stay  in the ﬁght to the bitter e nd. Ther e
is n o shame in getting kn ock ed out. The shame comes when
you thr ow in the motherf ucking towel, and if I was bor n to
suﬀer, then I may as well tak e my  medicine.
The training oﬃcer welco med me back and conﬁr med that I
was starting  fr om day o ne, week one. As e xpected, my
br own shirt would have to be swapped out for a white one,
and he  had one mor e sliver of sunshine to shar e. “ Just so you
know, Goggins,” he said,  “this will be the last time we will
allow you to go thr ough BUD/S training. If you get injur ed,
that’s it. W e will not allow you to come back  again.”
“ R oger that,” I  said.Class 235 would muster in just four weeks. My knee still
wasn’t all the way right, but I’d better be r eady because the
ultimate test was about to  begin.
W ithin seconds of hanging up the phone, P am called and said
she needed to see me. It was good timing. I wa s leaving
town again, hopefully for  good this time, and I needed to
level w ith her . W e’d been enjoying one another, but it was
always a temporary thing for me. W e’d been ma r ried once
and we wer e still diﬀer ent people with totally diﬀer ent
worldviews. That hadn’t c hanged and obviously ne ither had
some of my insecurities, as they k ept me going bac k to what
was fa miliar . Insanity is doing the same thing over and over
again a nd e x pecting a diﬀer ent r esult. W e would never work
and it was time to say  so .
She got to her news  ﬁrst.
“I’m late,” she said, as sh e burst thr ough the door, clutching
a br ow n paper bag. “ Lik e late  late.” She se emed e x cite d and
nervous as she disappear ed into the bathr oom. I could hear
that bag crinkle and the tearing open of a pack age as I lay
on my bed s taring at the ceiling. Minutes later, she opened
the bathr oom  door, a pr egnancy test in her ﬁst and a big
smile o n her face. “I knew it,” she said, biting her lower lip.
“ L ook, David, we’r e  pr egnant!”
I stood  up slow, she hug ged me with everything she had,
and he r e x citement br ok e  my heart. It wasn’t supposed to go
lik e this. I wasn’t r eady . My body was still br ok en, I was
$30,000 in cr edit car d de bt, and still only a r eser vist. I had
no addr ess of my own an d no car . I was unstable ,  and that
made me very insecur e. Plus, I wasn’t even in love  with this
woman. That’s what I said to myself while I star ed  into that
A ccountability Mir r or over her shoulder . The mir r or that never
lies.I averted my  eyes.
P am w ent ho me to shar e the news with her par ents. I walk ed
her to the do or of my mother’s place, then slumpe d into the
couch. In Cor onado, I felt lik e I’d come to ter ms  with my
fuck ed up past and found  some power ther e, and h er e I was
suck ed unde r once again. Now it wasn’t just about me and
my dr eams of becoming a SEAL. I had a family to think
about, which  raised the stak es that much higher .  If I failed
this time, it wouldn’t me an that I was just going back to
gr ound zer o, emotionally and ﬁnancially, but I would be
bringing my new family th er e with me. When my m other got
home I told h er everythin g, and as we talk ed the dam br ok e
and my  fear, sadness, and struggle came bursting out of me.
I put my head in my hands and  sobbed.
“Mom, my life fr om the tim e I was bor n until now has been a
nightmar e. A nightmar e that k eeps getting worse,” I said.
“The har der I try, the har der my life  becomes.”
“I can’ t ar gue  with that, D avid,” she said. My mom knew hell
and she wasn’t trying to baby me. She never had. “ But I also
know y ou we ll enough to know that you will ﬁnd a way to get
thr ough  this.”
“I h ave to,” I said as I wip ed the tears fr om my eye s. “I don’t
have a  choice.”
She lef t me alone, and I s at on that couch all night . I felt lik e
I’d bee n stripped of everything, but I was still br eathing,
which meant  I had to ﬁnd a way to k eep going. I had to
compartmentalize doubt and ﬁnd the str ength to believe that
I was bor n to be mor e than some tir ed - ass  Na vy SEAL r eject.
A f ter H ell W eek I’d felt I had become unbr eak able, yet within
a week  I’d been zer oed out. I hadn’t levelled up af ter all. I
still wa sn’t sh it, and if I was going to ﬁx my br ok e - down  life, I
would have to become  mor e!On that sofa, I found a  way .
By the n I’d lear ned how to hold myself accountable, and I
knew I  could tak e a man ’s soul in the heat of battle. I had
over come many obstacles, and r ealized that each of those
e xperiences had calloused my mind so thick, I cou ld tak e on
any challeng e. All of that that made me feel lik e I’d dealt
with my past demons, but I hadn’t. I’d been ignoring them.
My memories of abuse at the hands of my father, of all those
people who called me n igger, didn’t vaporize af ter a few
victories. Those moments wer e anchor ed dee p in my
subconscious, and as a r esult, my foundation was crack ed. In
a h uman being your character is your foundation, and when
you bu ild a bunch of s uccesses and pile up even mor e
failur es on a fuck ed - up  f ound ation, the structur e  that is the
self wo n’t be  sound. T o de velop an ar mor ed mind— a mindset
so calloused and har d that it becomes bulletpr oof—you need
to go to the sour ce of all your fears and  insecurities.
Most o f us sweep our failur es and evil secr ets unde r the rug,
but when we run into pr oblems, that rug gets lif ted up, and
our darkness r e - emer ges , ﬂoods our soul, and inﬂuences the
decisions wh ich deter mine our character . My fears wer e
never just about the water, and my anxieties towar d Class
235 we r en’t about the pain of F irst Phase. They wer e seeping
fr om th e infected wounds I’d been walking ar ound  with my
entir e life, and my denia l of them amounted to a  denial of
myself . I was my own worst enemy! It wasn’t the  world, or
God, or the Devil that was out to get me. It was  me!
I was r ejectin g my past and ther efor e r ejecting myself . My
foundation, my character was deﬁned by self - r ejection . All
my fea rs came fr om that deep - seated  u neas iness I car ried
with be ing David Goggins because of what I’d gone thr ough.
Even a f ter I’d r eached a point wher e I no longer car ed about
what others thought of me, I  still had tr ouble accepting  me .Anyone who is of sound mind and body can sit down and
think of twenty things i n their life that could h ave gone
diﬀer ently . Wher e maybe they didn’t get a fair shak e and
wher e they took the path of least r esistance. If you ’r e one of
the few who acknowledge that, want to callous those
wounds, and str engthen your character, its up to you to go
back thr ough your past and mak e peace with yourself by
facing those incidents and all of your negative inﬂuences,
and acceptin g them as weak spots in your own character .
Only w hen you identif y and accept your weaknesse s will you
ﬁnally stop running fr om y our past. Then those incidents can
be use d mor e eﬃciently as fuel to become better and gr ow
str onger .
Right ther e on mom’s couch, as the moon bur ned its ar c in
the night sk y, I faced down my demons. I faced myself . I
couldn’t run fr om my dad anymor e. I had to accept that he
was part of me and th at his lying, cheating character
inﬂuenced me mor e than I car ed to admit. Befor e that night,
I us ed to tell  people that my father had died rather than tell
the tru th about wher e I came fr om. Even in th e SEALs I
tr otted out that lie. I knew why . When you get beat up, you
don’t want to acknowledge getting your ass kick ed. It
doesn’t mak e  you feel ver y manly, so the easiest t hing to do
is for get about it and move on. P r etend it never  happened.
Not  anymor e.
Going forwar d it became very important for me to r ehash my
life, because when you e xamine your e xperiences with a
ﬁne - toothed  comb and see wher e your issues come fr om,
you ca n ﬁn d str ength in enduring pain and abuse. By
accepting T ru nnis Goggins as part of me, I was fr ee to use
wher e I came fr om as fuel. I r ealized that each episode of
child abuse that could have killed me made me tou gh as hell
and as sharp as a Samurai’s  blade.T rue, I had been dealt a fuck ed - up  hand, but that night I
started thinking of it as ru nning a 100- mile  race with a ﬁf ty -
pound  ruc k on my  back. Could I still compete in that r ace
even if everyone else was running fr ee and easy, weighing
130 po unds? How fast would I be able to run once I’d shed
that dead weight? I wasn’ t even thinking about ultras yet. T o
me the  race was life itself, and the mor e I took inve ntory, the
mor e I  r ealize d how pr epar ed I was for the fuck ed - up  events
yet to come. Life had put me in the ﬁr e, tak en me out, and
hammer ed me r epeatedly, and diving back into the BUD/S
cauldr on, feeling a thir d Hell W eek in a calendar year, would
decorate me  with a PhD in pain. I was about to be come the
sharpest swor d ever  made!
* * *
I s how ed up to Class 235 on a mission and k ept to myself
thr oughout m uch of F irst Phase. Ther e wer e 156 men in that
class o n day one. I still led fr om the fr ont, but I wa sn’t about
shepher ding anyone thr ough Hell W eek this time. My knee
was st ill sor e  and I neede d to put every ounce of ener gy into
getting my ass thr ough BUD/S. I had everything riding on the
ne xt six months, and I ha d no illusions about how diﬃcult it
would be to mak e it  thr ough.
Case in point: Shawn  Dobbs.
Dobbs gr ew up poor in Jacksonville, Florida. He battled some
of the same demons I did , and he came into class with a chip
on his shoulder . Right aw ay, I could see he was an elite,
natural athle te. He was a t or near the fr ont on all the runs,
he blit zed th e O - Course  i n 8:3 0 af ter  just a few r eps, and he
knew  he wa s a bad motherfuck er . Then again, lik e the T a oists
say, those that know don’t speak, and those who speak, well,
they don’t know jack  shit.On the  night befor e Hell W eek began he talk ed a lot of noise
about the guys in Class 235. Ther e wer e alr eady  ﬁf ty - ﬁve
helmets on the Grinder, and he was sur e he’d be one of a
handful of graduates at the end. He mentioned the guys he
knew  wo uld mak e it thr ough H ell W eek and also talk ed a lot
of nonsense about the guys he knew  would  quit.
He had  no clue that he was making the classic m istak e of
measuring himself against others in his class. Whe n he beat
them in an evolution or outperfor med them during PT, he
took a lot of pride in that. It boosted his self - conﬁdence  and
his pe rfor mance. In BUD/S, it’s common and nat ural to do
some of that. It’s all part of the competitive natu r e of the
alpha males  who ar e drawn to the SEALs, but he didn’t
r ealize that during Hell W eek you need a solid bo at cr ew to
survive, which means depending upon your classmates, not
defeating them. While he  talk ed and talk ed, I took notice. He
had no  idea what was in stor e for him and how bad sleep
deprivation a nd being cold fucks you up. He was about to
ﬁnd ou t. In the early hours of Hell W eek, he perfor med well,
but that same drive to d efeat his classmates in evolutions
and on timed runs came out on the  beach.
A t 5’4”  and 188 pounds, Dobbs was built lik e a ﬁr e hydrant,
but sin ce he  was short h e was assigned to a boa t cr ew of
smaller guys r efer r ed to as Smurfs by the instructors. In fact,
P sycho P ete made them d raw a pictur e of P apa Smurf on the
fr ont o f their  boat just to  fuck with them. That’s t he kind of
thing o ur instructors did.  They look ed for any way to br eak
you, and with Dobbs it w ork ed. He didn’t lik e being gr ouped
up with guys he consider ed smaller and weak er, and took it
out on his te ammates. Over the ne xt day he would  grind his
own cr ew down befor e ou r eyes. He took up the position at
the fr ont of the boat or the log and set a blistering pace on
the runs. Instead of chec king in with his cr ew an d holding
something back in r eserve, he went all out fr om the jump. Ir eached out to him r ecently and he said he r emember ed
BUD/S lik e it happened last  week.
“I was grinding an ax e on my own people,” he said. “I was
purposely be ating them down, almost lik e if I m ade guys
quit, it was a checkmark on my  helmet.”
By Mon day m or ning he’d  done a decent job of it. T wo of his
guys had  quit and that meant four smaller guys had to car ry
their boat and log by themselves. He admitted he was
ﬁghting his own demons on that beach. That his f oundation
was  crack ed.
“I was an insecur e person with low self esteem trying to
grind a n ax e,” he said, “ and my own ego, ar r ogance, and
insecurity made my own life mor e  diﬃcult.”
T ranslation: his mind br ok e down in ways he’d never
e xperienced befor e or  since.
On Monday af ter noon w e did a bay swim, and  when he
emer ged fr om the water , he was hurting. W atching him it
was ob vious he could bar ely walk and that his mind was
teetering on the brink. W e  lock ed eyes and I saw that he was
asking himself those simple questions and couldn’t ﬁnd an
answer . He look ed a lot lik e I did when I was in P arar escue,
sear ching for a way out. F r om then on Dobbs was one of the
worst perfor mers on the whole beach, and that fuck ed him
up  bad.
“ All th e people I’d categorized as lower than wor ms wer e
kicking my butt,” he said. Soon his cr ew was down to two
men, and he got moved  to another boat cr ew w ith taller
guys. When they lif ted th e boat head high, he wa sn’t even
able to r each that motherfuck er, and all of his insecurities
about his size and his past started caving in on  him.“I s tarted to believe tha t I didn’t belong ther e,” he said.
“That I  was genetically inferior . It was lik e I had superpowers,
and I’d lost th em. I was in  a place in my mind I’d never been,
and I didn’t have a r oad  map.”
Think about wher e he was at that time. This man had
e x celled thr o ugh the ﬁrst few weeks of BUD/S. He’d come
fr om nothing and was a phenomenal athlete. He had so
many e xperiences along the way he could have leaned on.
He’d calloused his mind plenty, but because his foundation
was crack ed,  when shit go t r eal he lost contr ol of his mindset
and became a slave to his self  doubt.
On Monday night, Dobbs r eported to medical co mplaining
about his feet. He was sur e he had str ess fractur es,  but when
he took oﬀ h is boots they wer en’t swollen or black  and blue
lik e he’d imagined. They look ed perfectly healthy . I know that
because I was at med ch eck too, sitting right beside him. I
saw hi s blank star e and knew the inevitable was n ear . It was
the loo k that comes over a man’s face af ter he sur r enders
his so ul. I had the same look in my eyes when I quit
P arar escue. W hat will for ever bond me and Shawn Dobbs is
the fact that I knew he was going to quit befor e he  did.
The docs oﬀer ed him Motrin and sent him back into the
suﬀering. I r emember watching Shawn lace his boots,
wondering at  what point he would ﬁnally br eak. That’s when
SB G pulled up in his truck and yelled, “This will be the
coldest night that you will ever e xperience in your entir e
lives!”
I w as under my boat w ith my cr ew headed towar d the
infamous Steel P ier when I glanced behind me and saw
Shawn in the back of SB G’s war m truck. He’d sur r ender ed.
W ithin minutes he would toll the bell thr ee times, and place
his helmet  down.In Dob bs’ defense, this was one nightmar e of a He ll W eek. It
rained all day and all n ight, which meant you never got
war m and never got dry .  Plus, somebody in command had
the brilliant idea that the class shouldn’t be fed and water ed
lik e kings at chow . Instea d, we wer e supplied cold MREs for
almost every meal. They  thought that would test us even
mor e. Mak e it mor e lik e a r eal - world  battleﬁeld situation. It
also meant ther e was absolutely no r elief, and without
abundant calories to bur n  it was har d for anybody to ﬁnd the
ener gy to push thr ough pain and e xhaustion, let alone k eep
war m.
Y es, it was miserable, but I fucking loved it. I thrived oﬀ of
the ba rbaric beauty of seeing the soul of a man destr oyed,
only to  rise again and ov er come every obstacle in his path.
By my  thir d go ’r ound, I knew what the human body could
tak e. I knew what I could tak e, and I was feeding oﬀ that shit.
A t t he same time, my legs didn’t feel right and my knee had
been b arking since day one. So far, the pain was something I
could handle for at least a couple mor e days, but the thought
of injury was a whole diﬀer ent piece of fuck - you  p ie that I
had to  block out of my mind. I went into a dark place wher e
ther e was just me and th e pain and suﬀering. I didn’t focus
on my classmates or my instructors. I went full caveman. I
was willing to die to mak e it thr ough that  motherfuck er .
I wasn ’t the only one. Lat e on W ednesday night, with thirty -
six  hou rs to go befor e the end of Hell W eek, tragedy h it Class
235. W e wer e in the pool for an evolution called the
caterpillar swim, in which each boat cr ew swam  on their
backs, legs lock ed ar ound  torsos, in a chain. W e had to use
our hands in concert to  swim.
W e muster ed up at the po ol. Ther e wer e just twenty - six  guys
lef t an d one of them was named John Sk op. Mr . Sk op was a
specimen at 6’2” and 225 pounds, but he’d been sick fr ombr eak out and had been in and out of med check all week.
While twenty - ﬁve  of us stood at attention on the pool deck,
swollen, chafed, and blee ding, he sat on the stairs by the
pool, jackham mering in the cold. He look ed lik e he was
fr eezing, but waves of he at pour ed oﬀ his skin. His  body was
a radiator on full blast. I could feel him fr om ten feet  away .
I’d had double pneumonia during my ﬁrst Hell W eek and
knew what it look ed and felt lik e. His alveoli, or air sacs, wer e
ﬁlling with ﬂuid. He couldn’t clear them so he could bar ely
br eathe, whi ch e xacerbat ed his pr oblem. When pneumonia
goes uncontr olled, it can lead to pulmonary edema, which
can be deadly, and he was half way  ther e.
Sur e enough, during the caterpillar swim, his legs went limp
and he  darte d to the bot tom of the pool lik e a doll stuﬀed
with le ad. T wo instructors jumped in af ter him and fr om ther e
it was chaos.  They or der ed us out of the water and lined us
up along the fence with our backs facing the pool as medics
work ed to r evive Mr . Sk o p. W e hear d everything and knew
his cha nces wer e slipping. F ive minutes later, he still wasn’t
br eathing, and they or der ed us to the lock er r oom. Mr . Sk op
was tra nsported to the hospital and we wer e told to run back
to the BUD/S  classr oom. W e didn’t know it yet, but Hell W eek
was alr eady over . Minutes  later, SB G walk ed in and deliver ed
the news  cold.
“Mr . Sk op is dead,” he said. He took stock of the r oom. His
wor ds had been a collective gut punch to men who wer e
alr eady on the knife’s edg e af ter nearly a week wit h no sleep
and no  r elief . SB G didn’t give a fuck. “This is the world you
live in. He’s not the ﬁrst and he won’t be the last to die in
your line of work.” He lo ok ed over at Mr . Sk op’s r oommate
and sa id, “Mr . Moor e, don’t steal any of his shit.” Then he lef t
the r oom lik e it was just another fuck ed - up  day .I fe lt tor n between grief, nausea, and r elief . I wa s sad and
sick to  my stomach that Mr . Sk op had died, but we wer e all
r elieved to have survived Hell W eek, plus the way SB G
handled it was straight ahead, no bullshit, and I r emember
thinking if all SEALs wer e  lik e him, this would de ﬁnitely be
the world for me. T alk about mix ed  emotions.
See, m ost civilians don’t understand that you need  a certain
level o f callousness to do the job we wer e being trained to
do . T o live in a brutal worl d, you have to accept cold - blooded
truths. I’m not saying it’s good. I’m not necessarily pr oud of
it. But special ops is  a calloused world and it demands a
calloused  mind.
Hell W eek had ended thirty - six  h ours  early . Ther e was no
pizza o r br ow n shirt cer emony on the Grinder, but twenty -
ﬁve  men out of a possible 156 had made it. Once again, I
was one of the few, and once again I was swollen lik e a
P illsbury doughboy and on crutches with twenty - one  weeks
of training still to come. My patella was intact, b ut both of
my sh ins wer e sliver ed with small fractur es. It gets worse.
The ins tructors wer e surly  because they’d been for ced to call
Hell W eek pr ematur ely, so they ended walk week  af ter just
forty - eight  hours. By every conceivable metric I was fuck ed.
When I moved my ankle, my shins wer e activated and I felt
searing pain, which was a monumental pr oblem because a
typical week in BUD/S dem ands up to sixty miles o f running.
Imagine doing that on two br ok en  shins.
Most of the guys in Class 235 lived on base at Naval Special
W arfar e Command in Cor onado . I lived about twenty miles
away in a $ 700 a month studio apartment wit h a mold
pr oblem in Chula V ista, which I shar ed with my pr egnant wife
and stepdaughter . A f ter she got pr egnant, P am and I
r emar ried, I ﬁnanced a new Honda P assport—which put me
r oughly $60,000 in debt—and the thr ee of us dr ove out fr omIndiana to San Diego to r estart our family . I’d just clear ed
Hell W eek for the second  time in a calendar year and she
was se t to deliver our baby right ar ound graduation, but
ther e w as no happiness in my head or my soul. How could
ther e be? W e lived in a shithole that was at the edge of
aﬀor dability, and my body was br ok en once again. If I
couldn’t mak e it thr ough  I wouldn’t even be able to aﬀor d
r ent, would have to start all over, and ﬁnd a new line of
work. I could not and would not let that  happen.
The night befor e F irst Phase kick ed back up in intensity, I
shaved my head and star ed into my r eﬂection. F or almost
two years straight I’d been taking pain to the e xtr eme and
coming back for mor e. I’d succeeded in spurts only to be
buried alive in failur e. That night, the only thing that allowed
me to continue pushing forwar d was the knowledge that
everything I’d been thr ough had helped callous my mind.
The question was, how thick was the callous? How much pain
could one man tak e? Did  I have it in me to run on br ok en
legs?
I wo k e up at 3:30 the ne xt mor ning and dr ove to the base. I
limped to the BUD/S ca ge wher e we k ept our gear and
slumped onto  a bench, dr opping my backpack at my feet. It
was da rk as hell inside a nd out, and I was all alone. I could
hear th e r olli ng surf in the  distance as I dug thr oug h my dive
bag. B uried beneath my  dive gear wer e two r olls of duct
tape. I  could  only shak e m y head and smile in dis belief as I
grabbed them, knowing how insane my plan  was.
I c ar ef ully pulled a thick black tube sock over my right foot.
The shin was tender to the touch and even the slightest
twitch of the ankle joint  r egister ed high on the suﬀering
scale. F r om ther e I looped  the tape ar ound my heel then up
over my ankle and back d own to my heel, eventually moving
both d own th e foot and u p my calf until my entir e  lower legand foot wer e wrapped tight. That was just the ﬁrst coat.
Then I put another black tube sock on and taped my foot and
ankle the same way . By the time I was done, I had two sock
layers and two tape layers , and once my foot was laced up in
the boot, my ankle and shin wer e pr otected and immobilized.
Satisﬁed, I did up my lef t foot, and an hour later, it was as
though both my lower leg s wer e sunk into sof t ca sts. It still
hurt to walk, but the to rtur e that I’d felt when my ankle
moved was mor e tolerab le. Or at least I thought so . I’d ﬁnd
out for sur e when we started to  run.
Our ﬁr st train ing run that day was my trial by ﬁr e, and I did
the best I cou ld to run wit h my hip ﬂe x ors. Usually we let our
feet and lower legs drive the r hythm. I had to r everse that. It
took intense focus to isolate each movement and generate
motion and power in my legs fr om the hip down, and for the
ﬁrst thirty minutes the pain was the worst I’d ever felt in my
life. The tape cut into m y skin, while the pounding sent
shockwaves of agony up my sliver ed  shins.
And this was just the ﬁrst run in what pr omised to be ﬁve
months of continual pain.  W as it possible to survive this, day
af ter day? I t hought about quitting. If failur e was my futur e
and I’d  have to r ethink my life completely, what was the
point of this e x er cise? Why delay the inevitable? W as I
fuck ed in the head? Each  and every thought boiled down to
the same old simple question: why?
“The o nly way to guarantee failur e is to quit right now,
motherfuck er!” I was talking to myself now . Silently
scr eaming o ver the din of anguish that was crushing my
mind and soul. “T ak e the pain, or it won’t just be your failur e.
It will be your family’s  failur e!”
I im agined the feeling I would have if I could actually pull this
oﬀ. If I coul d endur e the pain r equir ed to complete thismission. That  bought me another half mile befor e mor e pain
rained down and swirled within me lik e a  typhoon.
“ P eople have  a har d time  going thr ough BUD/S healthy, and
you’r e going thr ough it on  br ok en legs! Who else w ould even
think o f this? ” I ask ed. “W ho else would be able to  run even
one minute on one br ok en leg, let alone two? Only Goggins!
Y ou ar e twenty minutes i n the business, Goggins!  Y ou ar e a
fucking machine! Each st ep you run fr om now until the end
will only mak e you  har der!”
That la st message crack ed the code lik e a passwor d. My
calloused mi nd was my tick et forwar d, and at the forty -
minute  mark  some thing r emar k able happened. The p ain
r eceded to low tide. The  tape had loosened so it wasn’t
cutting into my skin, and my muscles and bones wer e war m
enough to tak e some pounding. The pain would come and go
thr oughout the day, but it became much mor e manageable,
and wh en the pain did show up, I told myself it wa s pr oof of
how tough I was and how much tougher I was  becoming.
Day af ter day the same ritual played itself out. I showed up
early, d uct ta ped my feet, endur ed thirty minutes of e xtr eme
pain, talk ed myself thr ou gh it, and survived. This was no
fak e - it - till - you - mak e - it  bullshit. T o me, the fact that I showed
up every day willing to put myself thr ough something lik e
that was  truly amazing. The instructors r ewar ded me for it
too . Th ey oﬀe r ed to bind my hands and feet and thr ow me in
the pool to se e if I could swim four fucking laps. In fact, they
didn’t oﬀer . They insisted . This was one part of an evolution
they l ik ed to call Dr own P r ooﬁng. I pr efer r ed to call it
contr olled  dr owning!
W ith o ur hands bound behind us and feet tied behind our
back, a ll we could do is d olphin kick, and unlik e some of the
e xperienced swimmers in our class, who look ed lik e they’d
been pulled fr om the Michael Phelps gene pool, my dolphinkick w as that of a stationary r ocking horse and pr ovided
about the same pr opulsio n. I was continually out of br eath,
ﬁghting to stay near the surface, chick en necking  my head
above the water to get a br eath, only to sink down and kick
har d, t rying in vain to ﬁnd  momentum. I’d practiced for this.
F or we eks, I’d hit the pool and even e xperimented with
wetsuit shorts to see if I could hide them under my unifor m
to pr o vide some buoyan cy . They made it look lik e I was
wearing a diaper unde r the tight - ass - nut - hugging  UDT
shorts, and they didn’t help, but all that practice d id get me
comfortable enough with the feeling of dr owning that I was
able to endur e and pass that  test.
W e had another brutal underwater evolution in Second
Phase, ak a dive phase. Again, it involved tr eading water,
which always  sounds basic as hell whenever I write  it, but for
this dr ill we wer e ﬁtted with fully - char ged , twin eighty - liter
tanks and a sixteen - pound  we ight belt. W e had ﬁns, but
kicking with ﬁns incr eased the pain quotient and str ess on
my ankles and shins. I couldn’t tape up for the water . I had to
suck up the  pain.
A f ter t hat we had to swim on our backs for ﬁf ty meters
without sinki ng. Then ﬂip over and swim ﬁf ty meters on our
stomach, onc e again staying on the surface, all w hile being
fully lo aded! W e wer en’t allowed to use any ﬂotation devices
whatsoever, and k eeping our heads up caused intense pain
in our necks, shoulders, hips, and lower  backs.
The noises coming out of the pool that day ar e something I’ll
never for get. Our desperate attempts to stay aﬂoat and
br eathe conjur ed an aud ible mixtur e of ter r or, frustration,
and e x ertion. W e wer e gur gling, grunting, and gasping. I
hear d guttural scr eams and high - pitched  squeals. Several
guys sank to the bottom , took oﬀ their weight belts, andslipped fr ee of their tanks , letting them crash to the ﬂoor of
the pool, then jetted to the  surface.
Only one man passed tha t evolution on the ﬁrst tr y . W e only
got thr ee chances to pass  any given evolution and it took me
all thr e e to pass that one. On my last attempt I fo cused on
long, ﬂuid scissor kicks, again using my overwork ed hip
ﬂe x ors. I bar ely made  it.
By the  time we got to Th ir d Phase, the land warfar e training
module on San Clemente  Island, my legs wer e healed up,
and I knew I’d mak e it thr ough to graduation, but just
because it was the last lap doesn’t mean it was easy . A t the
main BUD/S compound on The Strand, you get lots of look y -
loos  co ming thr ough. Oﬃcers  of all stripes stop in to watch
training, which means ther e ar e people peering over the
instructors’ s houlders. On the island, it’s just you and them.
They ar e fr ee to get nasty, and they show no mer cy . Which is
e xactly why I loved the  island!
One af ter noo n we split into teams of two and thr ee guys to
build hide sites that blen d in with the vegetation. W e wer e
coming down  to the end by then, and everyone was in killer
shape and unafraid. Guys wer e getting sloppy with their
attention to detail and t he instructors wer e pissed oﬀ, so
they called everyone down into a valley to give us a classic
beat  down.
Ther e would be push - ups , sit - ups , ﬂutter kicks, and eight -
count  b odybuilders  (advanced burpees) galor e. But ﬁrst they
told us to kn eel down and dig holes with our ha nds, lar ge
enough to bury ourselves up to the neck for some
unspeciﬁed l ength of time. I was smiling my ass oﬀ and
digging deep  when one of the instructors came up with a
new, cr eative way to tortur e  me.“ Goggins, ge t up. Y ou lik e  this shit too much.” I laughed and
k ept digging , but he was serious. “I said get up , Goggins.
Y ou’r e getting way too much  pleasur e.”
I s tood  up, stepped to the  side, and watched my classmates
suﬀer for the ne xt thirty minutes without me. F r om then on
the instructors stopped including me in their beat downs.
When the class was or de r ed to do push - ups , sit - ups , or get
wet and sandy, they’d always e x clude me. I took it as a point
of p ride that I’d ﬁnally b r ok en the will of the entir e BUD/S
staﬀ, but I also missed th e beat downs. Because I saw them
as opportunities to callous my mind. Now, they wer e over for
me.
Considering that the Grin der was center stage for a lot of
Navy SEAL training, it mak es sense that’s wher e BUD/S
graduation is  held. F amilies ﬂy in. F athers and br o thers puﬀ
their chests out; mothers , wives, and girlfriends ar e all done
up and dr op dead gor geo us. Instead of pain and misery, it
was all smiles on that patch of asphalt as the graduates of
Class 235 muster ed up in  our dr ess whites beneath a huge
American ﬂag billowing in  the sea br eeze. T o our right was
the infamous  bell that 130 of our classmates tolled in or der
to quit what is ar guably the most challenging training in the
military . Each of us was intr oduced and ackn owledged
individually . My mother ha d tears of joy in her eyes when my
name was called, but strangely, I didn’t feel much of
anything, e x cept  sadness.Mom and I at BUD/S graduation
On the  Grind er and later a t McP’s—the SEAL pub of choice in
downtown Co r onado—my teammates beamed with pride as
they gather ed to tak e photos with their families. A t the bar,
music blar ed while every one got drunk and raised hell lik e
they’d just won something. And to be honest,  that shit
annoyed me. Because I was sor ry to see BUD/S  go .
When I ﬁrst lock ed in on the SEALs, I was looking for an
ar ena that would either destr oy me completely or  mak e me
unbr eak able. BUD/S pr ovided that. It showed me what the
human mind  is capable of, and how to har ness it to tak e
mor e pain than I’d ever felt befor e, so I could lear n to
achieve things I never even knew wer e possible. Lik e running
on br o k en legs. A f ter graduation it would be up to me to
continue to hunt impossib le tasks because though it was an
accomplishment to become just the thirty - sixth  A fricanAmerican BUD/S graduate in Navy SEAL history, my quest to
def y the odds had only just  begun!C H A L L E N G E  # 5
It’s time to visualize! Again, the average person thinks
2,000–3,000 thoughts per hour . R ather than foc using on
bullshit you cannot change, imagine visualizing the things
you can. Choose any obstacle in your way, or set a new
goal, and visualize over coming or achieving it. Befor e I
engage in any challengi ng activity, I start by painting a
pictur e of what my success looks and feels lik e. I’ll think
about it every day and that feeling pr opels me forwar d when
I’m training, competing, or taking on any task I  choose.
But vis ualization isn’t simply about daydr eaming  of some
tr ophy cer emony—r eal or metaphorical. Y ou must also
visualize the challenges that ar e lik ely to arise and
deter mine how you will attack those pr oblems when they
do . Th at way you can b e as pr epar ed as possible on the
jour ney . Whe n I show up  for a foot race now, I drive the
entir e course ﬁrst, visualizing success but also potential
challenges, which helps me contr ol my thought pr ocess. Y ou
can’t p r epar e for everything but if you engage in strategic
visualization ahead of time, you’ll be as pr epar ed as you
possibly can  be.
That also means being pr epar ed to answer the simple
questions. Why ar e you doing this? What is driving you
towar d this achievement? Wher e does the darkness you’r e
using as fuel come fr om ? What has calloused your mind?
Y ou’ll n eed t o have those answers at your ﬁngertips when
you hit a wa ll of pain and doubt. T o push thr ou gh, you’ll
need to channel your dar kness, feed oﬀ it, and lean on your
calloused  mind.R emember, visualization will never compensate for work
undone. Y ou cannot visua lize lies. All the strategies I employ
to a nswer the simple que stions and win the mind game ar e
only eﬀective because I put in work. It’s a lot mor e than
mind over matter . It tak es r elentless self - discipline  to
schedule suﬀ ering into your day, every day, but if you do,
you’ll ﬁ nd th at at the oth er end of that suﬀering i s a whole
other life just waiting for  you.
This challenge doesn’t have to be physical, and victory
doesn’t alwa ys mean you came in ﬁrst place. It c an mean
you’ve ﬁnally  over come a lifelong fear or any other  obstacle
that m ade you sur r ender in the past. Whatever it i s, tell the
world your story about how you cr eated your #ar mor edmind
and wher e it’s tak en  you.C H A P T E R  S I X
6 .  IT’S NOT AB OUT A TROPHY
E VER YTHING  AB O UT  THE  R A CE  W AS  GOING  BET TER  THAN  I COULD  HA VE  HOPED .
Ther e w er e e nough clouds  in the sk y to blunt the h eat of the
sun, my r hythm was as  steady as the mellow tide that
sloshed against the hulls  of sailboats dock ed in the nearby
San Diego Marina, and th ough my legs felt heavy, that was
to be e xpected considering my “tapering“ plan the night
befor e. Besid es, they seemed to be loosening up as I
r ounded a bend to compl ete my ninth lap—my ninth mile—
just an hour and change into a twenty -four -hour  race.
That’s when I saw John Metz, race dir ector of the San Diego
One Day, eyeballing me at the start - ﬁnish  line. He was
holding up his white boa r d to infor m each competitor of
their time and position in the overall ﬁeld. I wa s in ﬁf th
place, which evidently con fused him. I oﬀer ed a cri sp nod to
r eassur e him  that I knew what I was doing, that I was right
wher e I was supposed to  be.
He saw thr ough that  shit.
Metz was a veteran. Always polite and sof t - spok en . It didn’t
look lik e ther e was much that could faze him, bu t he was
also a seasoned ultra - marathoner  with thr ee ﬁf ty - mile  races
in h is saddlebag. He’d either r eached or topped a hundr ed
miles, seven times, and he’d achieved his personal best of
144 m iles in twenty - four  ho urs when he was ﬁf ty years old!Which is why it meant something to me that he look ed
concer ned.
I ch eck ed my watch, sync ed to a heart rate monitor I wor e
ar ound my chest. My pulse straddled my magic number line:
145. A  few days earlier I’d run into my old BUD/S i nstructor,
SB G, at Naval Special W arfar e Command. Most SEALs do
r otations as instructors between deployments, and SB G and
I wo rk ed together . When I told him about the San Diego One
Day he insisted I wear a heart rate monitor to pace myself .
SB G was a big geek wh en it came to perfor mance and
r ecovery, and I watched as he scratched out a few for mulas,
then tur ned to me and  said, “ K eep your pulse steady
between 140  and 145 and you’ll be golden.” The ne xt day
he handed me a heart rate monitor as a race day  gif t.
If you set out  to mark a course that could crack open a Navy
SEAL li k e a walnut, chew him up, and spit him the fuck out,
San Diego’s Hospitality P oint would not mak e the cut. W e’r e
talking abou t ter rain so vanilla it’s downright ser ene.
T ourists descend year - r ound  fo r views of San Die go’s
stunning ma rina, which spills into Mission Bay . The r oad is
almost entir ely smooth asphalt and perfectly ﬂat, save a
brief seven - foot  inclin e with the pitch of a standar d
suburban driveway . Ther e ar e manicur ed lawns, pa lm tr ees,
and shade tr ees. Hospital ity P oint is so inviting that disabled
and convalescing folks head ther e with their walk ers for an
af ter noon’s r ehab str oll, a ll the time. But the day af ter John
Metz chalk ed his easy, one - mile  course, it became the scene
of my total  destruction.
I sh ould have known that  a br eakdown was coming. By the
time I started running at 10 a.m. on November 12 , 2005, I
hadn’t run mor e than a m ile in six months, but I look ed lik e I
was ﬁt because I’d never  stopped hitting the gym. While I
was st ationed in Iraq, on my second deployment with SEALT eam F ive earlier that y ear, I’d gotten back into serious
power lif ting, and my only dose of car dio was twenty
minutes on the elliptical  once a week. The point is, my
car diovascular ﬁtness was an absolute jok e, and still I
thought it was a brilliant idea to try and run a hund r ed miles
in twenty - four  hours.
Ok ay, it was always a fuck ed - up  ide a, but I consider ed it
doable because a hund r ed miles in twenty - four  hours
demands a pace of just under ﬁf teen minutes a mile. If it
came to it, I  ﬁgur ed I co uld walk that fast. Only, I didn’t
walk. W hen t hat hor n sounded at the start of the race, I took
oﬀ hot and zoomed to the fr ont of the pack. Ex actly the
right move if your race - day  goal is to blow the fuck  up.
Also, I didn’t  e xactly come in well - r ested . The night befor e
the rac e, I passed by the SEAL T eam F ive gym on my way oﬀ
base a f ter wo rk, and peek ed in lik e I always did, just to see
who w as getting af ter it. SB G was inside war ming up, and
called  out.
“ Goggins,” he said, “let’s jack some fucking steel!” I
laughed. He star ed me down.  “Y ou know, Goggins,” he said,
stepping closer, “ when the V ikings wer e getting r eady to
raid a fucking village, and they wer e camped out in the
fucking woods in their goddam tents made out of fucking
deer hides and shit, sitting ar ound a campﬁr e, do you think
they said, Hey , let’s have some herbal fucking tea and call it
an early night ? Or wer e they mor e lik e, F uck th at, w e are
going to drink some vod ka made out of some mu shrooms
and get all drunked up , so the ne xt mor ning whe n they wer e
all hung - over  and pissed o ﬀ they would be in the ideal mood
to slaughter the shit out of some  people?”
SB G co uld be a funny mo therfuck er when he wanted to be,
and he  could  see me wav ering, considering my op tions. Onthe one hand, that man would always be my BUD/S
instructor an d he was one of the few instructors who was
still ha r d, putting out, and living the SEAL ethos every day .
I’ll alw ays want to impr ess him. Jacking weights the night
befor e my ﬁrst 100 mile race would deﬁnitely impr ess that
masochistic motherfuck er . Plus, his logic made some fuck ed -
up  s ense to me. I needed to get my mind r eady to  go to
war, an d lif ti ng heavy would be my way of saying, bring on
all y our pain and misery, I’m r eady to go! But, hone stly, who
does that befor e running a hundr ed fucking  miles?
I s hook my h ead in disbelief, thr ew my bag to the gr ound
and started racking weights. W ith heavy metal blaring fr om
the speak ers, two knuckle draggers came together to put
the fuck out. Most of our w ork focused on the legs, including
long se ts of squats and dead lif ts at 315 pounds. In between
we bench pr essed 225. This was a r eal deal power - lif ting
session, and af terwar ds we sat on the bench ne xt to one
another and watched our quads and hamstrings quiver . It
was fucking funny…until it wasn’t.
Ultra running has gone at least somewhat mainstr eam since
then, but in 2005, most ultra races—especially the San
Diego One Day—wer e pr e tty obscur e, and it was a ll new to
me. W hen the majority of people think of ultras they pictur e
trail runs thr ough r emote wilder ness and don’t of ten
imagine cir cuit races, but ther e wer e some serious runners
in the ﬁeld at the San Diego One  Day .
This w as the American National 24- Hour  Championship and
athletes descended fr om all over the country hop ing for a
tr ophy, a place on the pod ium, and the modest winner - tak e -
all  c ash prize o f, ahem, $2,000. No, this was not a gilded
event, baskin g in corporate sponsorship, but it was the site
for a team comp betwee n the U.S. ultra - distance  national
team and a team fr om Japan. Each side ﬁelded teams offour men and four wom en who each ran for twenty - four
hours. One of the top individual athletes in the ﬁeld was also
fr om Ja pan. Her name was Ms. Inagaki, and early on  she and
I k ept  pace.
Ms. Inagaki and I during San Diego 100
SB G tur ned up to cheer me on that mor ning with  his wife
and two - year - old  son. They huddled up on the sidelines with
my ne w wife , K ate, who I ’d mar ried a few months befor e, a
little over two years af ter  my second divor ce fr om P am was
ﬁnalized. When they saw me, they couldn’t help but double
over in  laughter . Not just because SB G was still bea t up fr om
our wo rk out the night befor e, and her e I was trying  to run a
hundr ed miles, but beca use of how out of place I look ed.
When I spok e to SB G about it not long ago, the scene still
made him  laugh.“So ultra marathoners ar e a little weir d, right,” SB G said,
“and t hat mor ning it was lik e ther e wer e all these skinny
ass, c ollege pr ofessor looking, fucking granola eating
weir does, an d then ther e is this one big black d ude who
looks lik e a fucking lineback er fr om the R aiders, running
ar ound this track jack ed the fuck up with no shirt on, and
I’m thinking of that song we had in kinder garten… one of
these things is not like the other . Th at was th e song going
thr ough my head when I saw this fucking NFL li neback er
running ar ou nd this damn track with all these sk inny little
ner ds. I mean they wer e some har d motherfuck ers, those
runners. I am not taking  that away fr om them, but they
wer e all super clinical about nutrition and shit, and you just
put a pair of shoes on and said, let’s  go!”
He’s no t wr on g. I didn’t p ut much thought into my race plan
at all. I hatc hed it at W almart the night befor e, wher e I
bought a fold - out  lawn chair for K ate and me to use during
the race and my fuel for the entir e day : one bo x of Ritz
crack ers and two four - packs  of Myo ple x. I didn’t drink much
water . I didn’t even consider my electr olyte or potassium
levels or eat any fr esh fruit. SB G br ought me a  pack of
Hostess chocolate donuts when he showed up, and I
gobbled thos e in a few seconds. I mean, I was winging it for
r eal. Y e t, at mile ﬁf teen I was still in ﬁf th place, sti ll k eeping
pace with Ms. Inagaki, while Metz was getting mor e and
mor e nervous. He ran up to me and tagged  along.
“Y ou should slow down, D avid,” he said, “ P ace yourself a bit
mor e.”
I shrugged. “I got  this.”
It’s tru e that I felt ok ay in that moment, but my bravado was
also a defense mechanism . I knew if I wer e to start  planning
my race at that point, the bigness of it would become toomuch to compr ehend. It would feel lik e I was supposed to
run the length of the damn sk y . It would feel impossible. In
my mi nd, strategy was the enemy of the moment, which is
wher e I needed to be. T ranslation: when it came t o ultras, I
was gr een as fuck. Metz didn’t pr ess me, but he k ept a close
watch.
I ﬁn ished mile twenty - ﬁve  at about the four - hour  ma rk and I
was still in ﬁ f th place, still running with my new Japanese
friend. SB G was long gone, and K ate was my only support
cr ew . I ’d see her every mile, posted up in that lawn chair,
oﬀering a sip of Myople x and an encouraging  smile.
I’d run  a marathon only once befor e, while I was stationed in
Guam. It was unoﬃcial, a nd I ran it with a fellow SEAL on a
course we made up on the spot, but back then I was in
e x cellent car diovascular shape. Now, her e I was  bearing
down on 26.2 miles for j ust the second time in my entir e
life, this time without training, and once I got ther e I r ealized
that I’d  run beyond known ter ritory . I had twenty mor e hours
and nearly three more marathons to go . Those wer e
incompr ehensible metrics , with no traditional milestone in
between to focus on. I was  r unnin g acr oss the sk y . That’s
when I started thinking that this could end  badly .
Metz didn’t stop trying to help. Each mile he’d run alongside
and ch eck on  me, and me being who I am, I told him that I
had everything under co ntr ol and had it all ﬁgur ed out.
Which was true. I’d ﬁgur ed out that John Metz kn ew what
the fuck he was talking  about.
Oh yes, the p ain was becoming r eal. My quads thr obbed, my
feet wer e chafed and bleeding, and that simple question
was once again bubbling  up in my fr ontal lobe. Why? Why
run a hundre d fucking miles without training? W hy was I
doing this to myself? F air question s, especially since I hadn’teven h ear d of the San Diego One Day until thr ee days
befor e race day, but this  time my answer was d iﬀer ent. I
wasn’t on Hospitality P oin t to deal with my own demons or
to pr ove anything at all. I came with a purpose bigger than
David Goggins. This ﬁght was about my once and futur e
fallen teammates, and the families they leave behind when
shit goes  wr ong.
Or at least that’s what I told myself at mile twenty - seven .
* * *
I h ad gotten the news about Operation R ed W ings, a
doomed operation in the r emote mountains of A fghanistan,
on m y last da y of U.S. Ar my F r eefall school in Y uma , Arizona,
in June. Operation R ed W ings was a four - man
r econnaissance mission task ed with gathering intelligence
on a gr owing pr o - T aliban  for ce in a r egion called  Sawtalo
Sar . If successful, what they lear ned would help deﬁne
strategy for a lar ger oﬀen sive in the coming weeks. I knew
all four  guys.
Danny Dietz was in BUD/S  Class 231 with me. He got injur ed
and r o lled just lik e I did. Michael Murphy, the O IC of the
mission, was with me in Class 235 befor e he got r olled.
Matthew Ax e lson was in my Hooyah Class when I graduated
(mor e on the Hooyah C lass tradition in a moment), and
Mar cus L uttr ell was one of the ﬁrst people I met on my
original lap thr ough BUD/S.
Befor e training begins, each incoming BUD/S class thr ows a
party, and the guys fr om pr evious classes who ar e still in
BUD/S trainin g ar e always invited. The idea is to juice as
much infor mation fr om br own shirts as possible, because
you ne ver know what might help get you thr ough a crucial
evolution that could m ak e all the diﬀer ence betweengraduation and failur e. Mar cus was 6’4”, 225 pounds, and
he stuc k out in that cr owd  lik e I did. I was a bigger  guy too,
back up to 210 by then, and he sought me out. In some
ways we wer e an odd pa ir . He was a har d - ass  ax e handle
fr om the T e xas rangeland, and I was a self - made  masochist
fr om t he Indiana cor nﬁel ds, but he’d hear d I was a good
runner, and running was his main  weakness.
“ Goggins, do you have any tips for me?” he ask ed. “ Because
I can’t run for  shit.”
I knew Mar cus was a badass, but his humility made him r eal.
When he graduated a few  days later, we wer e hi s Hooyah
Class, which  meant we wer e the ﬁrst people they wer e
allowed to or der ar ound. They embraced that SEAL tradition
and told us to go get wet and sandy . It was a SEA L’s rite of
passage, and an honor to shar e that with him. A f ter that I
didn’t see him for a long  time.
I th ought I ra n into him ag ain when I was about to graduate
with Class 235, but it wa s his twin br other, Mor gan L uttr ell,
who was part of my Hoo yah Class, Class 237, along with
Matthew Ax elson. W e could have or der ed up some poetic
justice, but af ter we grad uated, instead of telling their class
to go get wet and sandy, we put ourselves in the su rf, in our
dr ess  whites!
I had something to do with  that.
In the Navy SEALs, you ar e either deployed and operating in
the ﬁeld, instructing other SEALs, or in school yourself,
lear ning or perfecting skills. W e cycle thr ough mor e military
schools than most because we ar e trained to do it all, but
when I went thr ough BUD /S we didn’t lear n to fr e efall. W e
jumped by static lines, which deployed ou r chutes
automatically . Back then you had to be chosen to attendU.S. A r my F r eefall School. A f ter my second plato on, I was
pick ed up for Gr een T ea m which is one of the  training
phases to get accepted into the Naval Special W arfar e
Development Gr oup (DEVGRU), an elite unit within the
SEALs. That r equir ed me  to get fr eefall qualiﬁed. It also
r equir ed that I face my fear of heights in the most
confr ontational way  possible.
W e sta rted oﬀ in the cla ssr ooms and wind tunnels of F ort
Bragg, North Car olina, which is wher e I r econnected with
Mor gan in 2005. Floating  on a bed of compr essed air in a
ﬁf teen - foot - high  wind tunnel, we lear ned cor r ect body
position, how to shif t lef t and right, and push forwar d and
back. It tak es very small movements with your palm to
move and it’s easy to sta rt spinning out of contr ol, which is
never good. Not everyone could master those subtleties but
those o f us who could lef t F ort Bragg af ter that ﬁrst week of
training and headed to an airstrip in the cactus ﬁelds of
Y uma to start jumping for  r eal.
Mor gan and I trained and  hung out together for fo ur weeks
in the 127- degr ee  desert heat of summer . W e did dozens of
jumps out of C130 transpo rt jets fr om altitudes ranging fr om
12,500 to 19,000 feet, an d ther e is no rush lik e the sur ge of
adr enaline a nd paranoia  that comes with plummeting to
earth fr om high altitude at ter minal velocity . Each  time we
jumped I couldn’t help but think of Scott Gear en, the
P arar escuman who survived a botched jump fr om high
altitude and inspir ed me on this path when I met him as a
high sc hool student. He was a constant pr esence for me in
that de sert, and a cautionary tale. P r oof that something can
go hor ribly wr ong on any given  jump.
When I  jumpe d out of an airplane for the ﬁrst time fr om high
altitude, all I felt was e x tr eme fear, and I couldn’t pry my
eyes fr om my altimeter . I wasn’t able to embrace the jumpbecause fear had clogged my mind. All I could think about
was whether or not my canopy would open. I was missing
the unbelievable thrill - ride  of the fr eefall, the beauty of the
mountains painted against the horizon, and the wide - open
sk y . But as I became conditioned to the risk, my tolerance
for that same fear incr eased. It was always ther e, but I was
used to the discomfort and befor e long I was able to handle
multiple tasks on a jump and appr eciate the moment too .
Seven years earlier I had been r ooting ar ound fast food
kitchens and open dumpsters zapping ver min. Now I was
fucking  ﬂying!
The ﬁn al tas k in Y uma w as a midnight jump in fu ll kit. W e
wer e weighe d down with a ﬁf ty - pound  rucksack, strapped
with a riﬂe a nd an o xygen mask for the fr eefall. W e wer e
also equipped with chem lights, which wer e a necessity
because when the back ramp of the C -130 opened  up, it
was pitch  black.
W e cou ldn’t s ee any damn thing, but still we leapt into that
moonless sk y , eight of u s in a line, one af ter another . W e
wer e suppos ed to for m an ar r ow, and as I maneuver ed
thr ough the r eal - world  wind tunnel to tak e my place in the
grand design, all I could see wer e swerving lights str eaking
lik e comets in an inkwell sk y . My goggles fogged u p as the
wind ri pped thr ough me. W e fell for a full minute, and when
we deployed our chutes at ar ound 4,000 feet, the
overpowering sound went fr om full tor nado to eerie silence.
It w as so quie t I could hea r my heart beat thr ough my chest.
It was fucking bliss, and when we all landed safely , we wer e
fr eefall quali ﬁed! W e had no idea that at that mo ment, in
the mountains of A fghanistan, Mar cus and his team wer e
lock ed into an all - out  battle for their lives, at the center of
what would become the worst incident in SEAL  history .One of the best things about Y uma is that you have hor rible
cell service. I’m not big o n te xting or talking on t he phone
so this  gave me four we eks of peace. When you graduate
any military school, the last thing you do is clea n all the
ar eas your class used unt il it’s lik e you wer e never ther e. My
cleaning detail was in char ge of the bathr ooms, which
happened to be one of the only places in Y uma that has cell
service, and as soon as I walk ed in I could hear m y phone
blow up. T e xt messages about Operation R ed W ings going
bad ﬂooded in, and as I r ead them my soul br ok e. Mor gan
hadn’t hear d anything about it yet, so I walk ed outside,
found him, and told him the news. I had to . Mar cus and his
cr ew w er e all MIA and pr esumed KIA . He nodded, co nsider ed
it for a second, and said, “My br other’s not  dead.”
Mor gan is seven minutes older than Mar cus. They wer e
inseparable as kids, and the ﬁrst time they’d ever been
apart for longer than a day was when Mar cus joined the
Navy . M or gan opted for college befor e joining up, and during
Mar cus’ Hell W eek, he tried to stay up the whole time in
solidarity . He wanted and needed to shar e that feeling, but
ther e i s no such thing as  a Hell W eek simulation. Y ou have
to go thr ough it to kno w it, and those that su rvive ar e
for ever changed. In fact, the period af ter Mar cus survived
Hell W eek and befor e Mor gan became a SEAL himself was
the only time ther e was any emotional distance between the
br others, which speaks to  the power of those 130 hours and
their emotion al toll. Once Mor gan went thr ough it for r eal,
everything w as right again. They each have half a T rident
tattooed on their back. T he pictur e is only complete when
they stand side by  side.
Mor gan took oﬀ immedi ately to drive to San Diego and
ﬁgur e out what the hell was going on. He still hadn’t hear d
anything about the operation dir ectly, but once he r eached
civilization and his servic e hit, a tide of messages ﬂoodedhis ph one too . He ﬂoor ed his r ental car to 120 mph and
zoomed dir ectly to the base in  Cor onado .
Mor gan knew  all the guys in his br other’s unit well . Ax elson
was hi s classmate in BUD/S, and as facts trickled in it was
obvious to most that his br other wouldn’t be found alive. I
thought he was gone too, but you know what they say about
twins.
“I knew  my br other was out ther e, alive,” Mor gan told me
when we connected aga in in April 2018. “I said that the
whole  time.”
I’d cal led Mor gan to talk about old times and ask ed him
about the har dest week i n his life. F r om San Diego , he ﬂew
out to  his family’s ranch in Huntsville, T e xas, wher e they
wer e getting  updates twice a day . Dozens of fellow SEALs
tur ned up to show support, Mor gan said, and for ﬁve long
days, he and his family c ried themselves to sleep  at night.
T o them it was tortur e knowing that Mar cus might be alive
and alone in hostile ter ritory . When oﬃcials fr om the
P entagon ar rived, Mor gan made himself clear as cut glass,
“[Mar cus] ma y be hurt a nd fuck ed up, but he’s alive  and
either you go out ther e and ﬁnd him, or I  will!”
Operation R ed W ings went hor ribly wr ong because ther e
wer e many mor e pr o - T aliban  hajjis active in those mountains
than h ad been e xpected, and once Mar cus and his team
wer e discover ed by villag ers ther e, it was four guys against
a well - ar med  mi litia of s omewher e b etween 30–200 men
(r eports on the size of the pr o - T aliban  for ce vary). Our guys
took RPG and machine gu n ﬁr e, and fought har d. F o ur SEALs
can put on a hell of a show . Each one of us can usu ally do as
much damag e as ﬁve r egular tr oops, and they made their
pr esence  felt.The battle played out alo ng a ridgeline above 9,000 feet in
elevation, wh er e they had communication tr oubles. When
they ﬁnally br ok e thr ough  and the situation was made plain
to their commanding oﬃcer back at special o perations
headquarters, a quick r eaction for ce of Navy SEALs,
marines, and aviators fr om 160th Special O perations
A viation R eg iment was assembled, but they wer e  delayed
for hours because of lac k of transport capacity . One thing
about the SEAL teams is we don’t have our own transport. In
A fghanistan we hitch ride s with the Ar my, and that delayed
r elief .
They eventually loaded up into two Chinook transport
choppers and four attack helicopters (two Black Hawks and
two Apaches ) and took oﬀ for Sawtalo Sar . The Chinooks
took the lead, and as they closed in on the ridge, they wer e
hit by  small ar ms ﬁr e. Despite the onslaught, the ﬁrst
Chinook hover ed, attempting to unload eight Navy SEALs on
a mountain top, but they made a fat tar get, linger ed too
long, and wer e hit with a r ock et pr opelled gr enade . The bir d
spun, crashed into the mountain, and e xploded. Everyone
aboar d was killed. The r emaining choppers bailed out, and
by the time they could r e tur n with gr ound assets, everyone
who was lef t behind, including Mar cus’ thr ee teammates on
Operation R ed W ings, was found dead. Everyone, that is,
e x cept for  Mar cus.
Mar cus was hit multiple  times by enemy ﬁr e and went
missing for ﬁve days. He was saved by A fghan villagers who
nursed and shelter ed him, and was ﬁnally found alive by
U.S. tr oops on July 3, 2 005, when he became the lone
survivor of a mission that took the lives of nineteen special
operations war riors, including eleven Navy  SEALs.
No doubt, you’ve hear d this story befor e. Mar cus  wr ote a
bestselling book about it, Lone Survivor , which became a hitmovie star rin g Mark W ahlber g. But in 2005, that was all
years away, and in the af ter math of the worst b attleﬁeld
loss ever to hit the SEALs, I was looking for a way to
contribute to  the families of the men who wer e k illed. It’s
not lik e bills stop r olling in af ter a tragedy lik e that. Ther e
wer e w ives a nd kids out t her e with basic needs to fulﬁll, and
eventually th ey’d need their college educations cover ed too .
I wanted to help in any way I  could.
A few weeks befor e all of this, I’d spent an evening Googling
ar ound for the world’s tou ghest foot races and landed on a
race c alled Badwater 135. I’d never even hear d  of ultra
marathons b efor e, and Badwater was an ultra mar athoner’s
ultra m arathon. It started below sea level in Death V alley
and ﬁn ished at the end of  the r oad at Mount Whitney P ortal,
a trailhead located at 8,374 feet. Oh, and the race tak es
place in late July, when Death V alley isn’t just the lowest
place on Earth. It’s also the  hottest.
Seeing images fr om that race materialize on my monitor
ter riﬁed and thrilled me. The ter rain look ed all kinds of
harsh, and the e xpr essions on tortur ed runners’ faces
r eminded me  of the kind  of thing I saw in Hell W eek. Until
then, I’d always consider e d the marathon to be the pinnacle
of endurance racing, an d now I was seeing ther e wer e
several levels beyond it.  I ﬁled the infor mation away and
ﬁgur ed I’d come back to it  someday .
Then Operation R ed W ings happened, and I vowed to run
Badwater 135 to raise money for the Special Operations
W ar rior F oun dation, a non - pr oﬁt  founded as a battleﬁeld
pr omise in 1980, when eight special operations  war riors
died in  a helicopter crash  during the famous hostage r escue
operation in Iran and lef t seventeen childr en behind. The
surviving servicemen pr omised to mak e sur e each one of
those kids had the mon ey to go to college. Th eir workcontinues. W ithin thirty days of a fatality, lik e those that
occur r ed during Operation R ed W ings, the fou ndation’s
har dworking staﬀ r each out to surviving family  members.
“W e ar e the interfering aunt,” said Ex ecutive Dir ector Edie
R osenthal. “W e become a part of our students’ lives.”
They pay for pr eschool and private tutoring during grade
school. They ar range college visits and host peer support
gr oups. They help with applications, buy books, laptop
computers, and printers, and cover tuition at w hichever
school one of their students manages to gain acceptance,
not to mentio n r oom and boar d. They also send students to
vocational schools. It’s all up to the kids. As I write this, the
foundation has 1,280 kids in their  pr ogram.
They ar e an amazing or ga nization, and with them in mind, I
called Chris K ostman, R ace Dir ector of Badwater 135, at 7
a.m. in mid - November , 20 05. I tried to intr oduce  myself, but
he cut  me oﬀ, sharp. “ Do you know what time it is?!” he
snapped.
I to ok the ph one away fr om my ear and star ed at it for a
second. In those days, b y 7 a.m. on a typical weekday I’d
have alr eady r ock ed a two - hour  gym work out and was r ea dy
for a day’s w ork. This dude was half asleep. “ R oge r that,” I
said. “I’ll call you back at  0900.”
My second call didn’t go much better, but at least  he knew
who I was. SB G and I had alr eady discussed Badwater and
he’d emailed K ostman a letter of r ecommendation. SB G has
raced triathlons, captained a team thr ough the Eco -
Challenge , a nd watche d several Olympic qualiﬁers attempt
BUD/S. In his email to K ostman, he wr ote that I was the
“best endu rance athle te with the gr eatest  mental
toughness” he’d ever see n. T o put me, a kid who c ame fr omnothing, at the top of his list meant the world to me  and still
does.
It d idn’t mean shit to Chr is K ostman. He was the deﬁnition
of unimpr essed. The kind of unimpr essed that can only
come fr om r eal - world  e xperience. When he was twenty
years old he’d competed in the R ace A cr oss America bicycle
race, and befor e taking over as Badwater race dir ector, he’d
run thr ee 100- mile  r aces in win ter in Alask a and completed
a triple Ir onman triathlon, which ends with a seventy - eight -
mile  r un. Along the way, he’ d seen dozens of supposedly
gr eat athletes crumble beneath the anvil of  ultra.
W eek end war riors sign up for and complete marathons af ter
a few month s’ training all the time, but the gap between
marathon running and becoming an ultra athlete is much
wider, and Badwater was the absolute ape x of the ultra
universe. In 2005, ther e wer e appr o ximately twenty - two
100- mile  rac es held in  the United States, and none had the
combination of the elevation gain and unfor giving heat that
Badwater 13 5 br ought to the table. Just to put on the race,
K ostman had to wrangle  per missions and assista nce fr om
ﬁve go ver nment agencies, including the National F or est
Service, the National P ark Service, and the Califor nia
Highway P at r ol, and he knew that if he allow ed some
gr eenhor n in to the most diﬃcult race ever conceived, in the
middle of summer, that motherfuck er might die, and his
race would vaporize over n ight. No, if he was going  to let me
compete in Badwater, I  was going to have to  ear n it.
Because ear n ing my way in would pr ovide him at le ast some
comfort that I pr obably wouldn’t collapse into a steaming
pile of r oad k ill somewher e between Death V alley a nd Mount
Whitney .
In his email, SB G attempt ed to mak e a case that because I
was busy working as a S EAL, the pr er equisites r equir ed tocompete at Badwater—the completion of at least one 100-
mile  race or one twenty - four - hour  race, while covering at
least one hundr ed miles— should be waived. If I was allowed
in, SB G guaranteed him  that I’d ﬁnish in the top ten.
K ostman wasn’t having any of it. He’d had accomplished
athletes beg  him to wai ve his standar ds over the years,
including a champion marathoner and a champion sumo
wr estler (yeah, no shit), and he’d never  budged.
“ One thing about me is, I’m the same with everyone,”
K ostman said when I called him back. “W e have certain
standar ds for getting into  our race, and that’s the way it is.
But hey, ther e’s this twenty - four - hour  race in San Diego
coming up this week end,” he continued, his voice dripping
with sar casm . “ Go run one hundr ed miles and get back to
me.”
Chris K ostman had made me. I was as unpr epar ed as he
suspected. T he fact that I wanted to run Badwater was no
lie, and I pla nned to train for it, but to even have a chance
to do that I’d  have to run one hundr ed miles at the  dr op of a
damn hat. If I chose not t o, af ter all that Navy SEA L bluster,
what w ould that pr ove? That I was just another p r etender
ringing his bell way too early on a W ednesday mor ning.
Which is how and why I wound up running the S an Diego
One Day with thr ee days’ notice.
* * *
A f ter surpassing the ﬁf ty - mile  mark,  I could no longer k eep
up with Ms. Inagaki, who bounded ahead lik e a damn rabbit.
I soldie r ed on in a fugue state. P ain washed thr ou gh me in
waves. My thighs felt lik e  they wer e loaded with lead. The
heavier they got the mor e twisted my stride became. I
tor qued my hips to k eep m y legs moving and fought gravity
to l if t m y fee t a mer e mill imeter fr om the earth. Ah, yes, myfeet. My bones wer e becoming mor e brittle by the second,
and m y toes had banged the tips of my shoes for n early ten
hours. Still, I fucking ran. Not fast. Not with much style. But I
k ept  going.
My shins wer e the ne xt domino to fall. Each subtle r otation
of t he ankle joint felt lik e shock therapy—lik e venom  ﬂowing
thr ough the mar r ow of m y tibia. It br ought back memories
of my duct tape days fr om Class 235, but I didn’t bring any
tape w ith me  this time. B esides, if I stopped for ev en a few
seconds, starting up again would be near  impossible.
A fe w m iles l ater, my lungs seized, and my chest rattled as I
hock ed up knots of br own  mucus. It got cold. I became short
of br eath. F og gather ed ar ound the halogen str eet lights,
ringing the lamps with electric rainbows, which lent the
whole event an otherwor ldly feel. Or maybe it was just me
in tha t other world. One in which pain was the mother
tongue, a language synced to  memory .
W ith every lung - scraping  co ugh I ﬂashed to my ﬁrst BUD/S
class. I was back on the motherfucking log, staggering
ahead, my lungs bleeding. I could feel and see it happening
all over again. W as I asleep? W as I dr eaming? I opened my
eyes w ide, pulled my ears and slapped my face to wak e up.
I felt my lips and chin for fr esh blood, and found a
translucent slick of saliva, sweat, and mucus dribbling fr om
my nose. SB G’s har d - ass  ne r ds wer e all ar ound me now,
running in cir cles, pointing , mocking the only;  t he  on ly blac k
man in  the mix. Or wer e t hey? I took another look. Everyone
who pa ssed me was focused. Each in their own pain zone.
They didn’t even see  me.
I was losing touch with r eality in small doses, because my
mind was folding over on itself, loading tr emendous physical
pain w ith da rk emotional  garbage it had dr edged up fr omthe depths of my soul. T ranslation: I was suﬀeri ng on an
unholy level r eserved for dumb fucks who thought the laws
of physics and physiolog y did not apply to them. Cock y
bastar ds lik e  me who felt lik e they could push t he limits
safely because they’d done a couple of Hell  W eeks.
Right, well, I hadn’t don e this . I had n’t ru n one hundr ed
miles with zer o training . Had anybody in the history of
mankind eve n attempte d something so fucking  foolish?
Could this  even be done at all? Iterations of that one simple
question slid  by lik e a digital tick er on my brai n scr een.
Bloody thought bubbles ﬂoated fr om my skin and  soul.
Why? Why? Why the f uck are you still doing this to
yourself?!
I hit  th e inclin e at mile sixty - nine —that seven - foot  ramp, the
pitch of a shallow driveway—which would m ak e any
seasoned tra il runner laugh out loud. It buckled m y knees
and se nt m e r eeling backwar d lik e a delivery truck in
neutral. I stagger ed, r eac hed for the gr ound with the tips of
my ﬁngers, and nearly capsized. It took ten se conds to
cover the distance. Each  one dragged out lik e an elastic
thr ead, sending shockwaves of pain fr om my toes to the
space behind  my eyeballs. I hack ed and coughed, my gut
twisted. Collapse was imminent. Collapse is what the fuck I
deserved.
A t the seventy - mile  mark  I couldn’t tak e another step
forwar d. K ate had set up our lawn chair on the grass near
the sta rt/ﬁnish line and when I teeter ed towar d her I saw her
in t riplicate, six hands gr oping towar d me, guiding me into
that folding chair . I was dizzy and dehydrated, starved of
potassium and  sodium.K ate w as a nurse; I had E MT training, and went thr ough my
own mental checklist. I knew my blood pr essur e was
pr obably danger ously low . She r emoved my shoes. My foot
pain was no Shawn Dobbs illusion. My white tube socks
wer e cak ed in blood fr om crack ed toenails and br ok en
blisters. I ask ed K ate to g rab some Motrin and anything she
thought migh t be helpful fr om John Metz. And when she was
gone, my body continued to decline. My stomach rumbled
and wh en I look ed down I saw bloody piss leak down my leg.
I shit mysel f too . Liqueﬁed diar r hea r ose in the space
between my ass and a law n chair that would never be quite
the sa me ag ain. W orse, I had to hide it because I knew if
K ate saw how bad oﬀ I r eally was she would beg m e to pull
out of the  race.
I’d run seventy miles in t welve hours with no training, and
this wa s my r ewar d. T o my lef t on the lawn was another
four - pack  of Myople x.  Only a muscle head lik e me would
choose that thick - ass  pr o tein drink as my hydra ting agent of
choice. Ne xt to it was half a bo x of Ritz crack ers, the other
half now congealing and chur ning in my stomach and
intestinal tract lik e an orange  blob.
I sat ther e with my head in my hands for twenty minutes.
R unners shuﬄ ed, glided, or stagger ed past me, as I felt time
tick do wn on  my hastily im agined, ill - conceived  dr eam. K ate
r etur ned, knelt down, and helped me lace back up. She
didn’t know the e xtent of my br eakdown and hadn’t quit on
me yet . That was something, at least, and in her hands wer e
a welcome r eprieve fr om mor e Myople x and mor e Ritz
crack ers. She handed me Motrin, then some cookies and
two peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, which I washed
down with Gatorade. Then she helped me  stand.
The wo rld wo bbled on its axis. Again she split into two, then
thr ee, but she held me ther e as my world stabiliz ed and Itook a single, solitary ste p. Cue the ungodly pain. I didn’t
know i t yet, but my feet wer e sliver ed with str ess fractur es.
The to ll of hubris is heavy on the ultra cir cuit, and my bill
had co me due. I took an other step. And another . I winced.
My eyes water ed. Another step. She let go . I walk ed  on.
Slowly .
W ay too fucking  slow .
When I stopped at the seventy - mile  ma rk, I was well ahead
of the pace I needed to run one hundr ed miles in twenty
four ho urs, b ut now I was  walking at a twenty - minute - a - mile
clip, which was as fast as I could possibly move. Ms. Inagaki
br eezed by me and glanced over . Ther e was pain in her eyes
too, but she still look ed  the part of an athlete.  I was a
motherfucking zombie, giving away all the pr ecious time I
stor ed up, watching my mar gin for er r or bur n to ash. Why?
Again the same boring q uestion. Why?  F our hours later, at
nearly 2 a.m., I hit the eighty - one - mile  mark and K ate br ok e
some  news.
“I d on’t believe you’r e go nna mak e the time at th is pace,”
she said, walking with m e, encouraging me to drink mor e
Myople x. She didn’t cushion the blow . She was matter - of -
fact  about it. I star ed over at her, mucus and Myople x
dripping dow n my chin, all the life drained fr om my eyes.
F or fo ur hours, each agonizing step had d emanded
maximum foc us and eﬀort, but it wasn’t enough and unless
I co uld ﬁnd mor e, my philanthr opic dr eam was  dead. I
chok ed and coughed. T ook another  sip.
“ R oger that,” I said sof tly . I knew that she was right. My
pace continued to slow and was only getting  worse.
That’s when I ﬁnally r ealized that this ﬁght wasn’t about
Operation R e d W ings or th e families of the fallen. It  was to apoint, but none of that w ould help me run nineteen mor e
miles befor e 10 a.m. No, this run, Badwater, my entir e
desir e to push myself to t he brink of destruction, was about
me. It was about how m uch I was willing to su ﬀer, how
much mor e I could tak e, and how much I had to give. If I
was gonna mak e it, this shit would have to get  personal.
I sta r ed down at my legs.  I could still see a trail of dried piss
and blood stuck to my in ner thigh and thought to myself,
who in this entir e fuck ed - up  world would still be in thi s ﬁght?
Only y ou, Go ggins! Y ou haven’t trained, you don’t know dick
about hydration and pe rformance—all you know is you
refuse to  quit.
Why?
It’s funny, humans tend to hatch our most challenging goals
and dr eams, the ones that demand our gr eatest eﬀort yet
pr omise absolutely nothing, when we ar e tuck ed into our
comfort zones. I was at work when K ostman laid out his
challenge for  me. I’d just had a war m shower . I was fed and
water ed. I was comfortable. And looking back, every single
time I’ve been inspir ed to do something diﬃcult, I was in a
sof t envir onment, because it all sounds doable when you’r e
chilling on your fucking co uch, with a glass of lemonade or a
chocolate shak e in your hand. When we’r e comfortable we
can’t a nswer those simple questions that ar e boun d to arise
in the heat o f battle because we don’t even r ealize they’r e
coming.
But those answers ar e v ery important when yo u ar e no
longer in your air - conditioned  r oom or under your ﬂuﬀy
blank et. When your body is br ok en and beaten, when you’r e
confr onted with agonizing pain and staring into the
unknown, your mind will spin, and that’s when those
questions become to xic. If you ar en’t pr epar ed in advance, ifyou allow your mind to r emain undisciplined in an
envir onment of intense suﬀering (it won’t feel lik e it, but it is
very m uch a choice you ar e making), the only answer you
ar e lik ely to ﬁnd is the on e that will mak e it stop as fast as
possible.
I don’t  know .
Hell W e ek changed everyt hing for me. It allowed me to have
the mi ndset to sign up for that twenty - four - hour  race with
less than a w eek’s notice because during Hell W ee k you live
all t he emotions of life, all the highs and lows, in six days. In
130 hours, you ear n dec ades of wisdom. That’s why ther e
was a schism between the twins af ter Mar cus went thr ough
BUD/S. He’d gained the kind of self - knowledge  t ha t c an only
come fr om being br ok en down to nothing and ﬁnding mor e
within. Mor gan couldn’t speak that language until he
endur ed it for  himself .
A f ter s urviving two Hell W eeks and participating i n thr ee, I
was a  native speak er . Hell W eek was home. It was the
fair est place  I’ve ever been in this world. Ther e wer e no
timed evolutions. Ther e was nothing graded, and ther e wer e
no tr ophies. It was an all - out  war of me against me, and
that’s e xactl y wher e I found myself again when I was
r educed to my absolute lowest on Hospitality  P oint.
Why?! Why are you still doing this to yourself , Goggins?!
“ Because you ar e one har d motherfuck er,” I  scr eamed.
The vo ices in my head wer e so penetrating, I ha d to bite
back o ut loud. I was onto  something. I felt an ener gy build
immediately, as I r ealized that still being in the ﬁght was a
miracle in itself . Ex cept it wasn’t a miracle. God didn’t come
down and bless my ass. I did this!  I  k ept going when I shoul d
have q uit ﬁve hours ago . I am the rea son I still h ave achance . And I r emember ed something else too . This wasn’t
the ﬁr st time I’d tak en o n a seemingly impossible task. I
pick ed up my pace. I was still walking, but I wasn’t
sleepwalking anymor e. I had life! I k ept digging into my
past, into my own imaginary Cookie  Jar .
I r emember ed as a kid, no matter how fuck ed up our life
was, my mother always ﬁ gur ed out a way to stock our damn
cookie jar . She’d buy wafers and Or eos, P epperidge F ar m
Milanos and Chips Ahoy!, and whenever she showed up with
a new batch of cookies, she dumped them into one jar . W ith
her per missio n we’d get t o pick one or two out at a time. It
was lik e a mini tr easur e hunt. I r emember the joy of
dr opping my ﬁst into that jar, wondering what I’d ﬁnd, and
befor e I crammed the cookie in my mouth I always took the
time t o admir e it ﬁrst, e specially when we wer e br ok e in
Brazil. I’d tur n it ar ound in my hand and say my own little
prayer of thanks. The feeling of being that kid, lock ed in a
moment of gratitude for a simple gif t lik e a cookie, came
back t o me. I felt it visc erally, and I used that co ncept to
stuﬀ a new kind of Cookie Jar . Inside it wer e all my past
victories.
Lik e th e time  when I had  to study thr ee times as  har d as
anybody else during my senior year in high school just to
graduate. That was a cookie. Or when I passed the ASV AB
test as  a senior and then again to get into BUD/S. T wo mor e
cookies. I r emember ed dr opping over a hundr ed pounds in
under thr ee months, conquering my fear of water,
graduating B UD/S at the top of my class, and bein g named
Enlisted Honor Man in Ar my R anger School (mor e on that
soon). All those wer e cookies loaded with chocolate  chunks.
These wer en ’t mer e ﬂashbacks. I wasn’t just ﬂoating
thr ough my memory ﬁles, I actually tapped into the
emotional sta te I felt during those victories, and in so doingaccessed my  sympatheti c nervous system once again. My
adr enaline took over, the  pain started to fade just enough,
and my pace pick ed up.  I began swinging my a r ms and
lengthening m y stride. My fractur ed feet wer e still a bloody
mess, full of blisters, the  toenails peeling oﬀ almost every
toe, but I k e pt pounding, and soon it was me who was
slaloming runners with pained e xpr essions as I raced the
clock.
F r om then on, the Cookie Jar became a concept I’ve
employed wh enever I need a r eminder of who I am and
what I’m capable of . W e all have a cookie jar inside us,
because life,  being what it is, has always tested us. Even if
you’r e feelin g low and beat down by life right now, I
guarantee y ou can think of a time or two w hen you
over came od ds and tasted success. It doesn’t hav e to be a
big victory either . It can be something  small.
I know we all want the whole victory today, but when I was
teaching my self to r ead I would be happy when I could
understand every wor d in  a single paragraph. I knew I still
had a long way to go to move fr om a thir d - grade  r eading
level to  that of a senior in high school, but even a small win
lik e tha t was enough to k eep me inter ested in lear ning and
ﬁnding mor e within myself . Y ou don’t dr op one hundr ed
pounds in less than thr ee months without losing ﬁve pounds
in a week ﬁrst. Those ﬁrst ﬁve pounds I lost wer e a small
accomplishment, and it doesn’t sound lik e a lot, but at the
time it  was pr oof that I co uld lose weight and that my goal,
however impr obable, was not  impossible!
The engine in a r ock et ship does not ﬁr e without a small
spark ﬁrst. W e all need small sparks, small accomplishments
in our lives to fuel the big ones. Think of your small
accomplishments as kindling. When you want a bonﬁr e, you
don’t start by lighting a big log. Y ou collect some witch’shair—a small pile of hay or some dry, dead grass.  Y ou light
that, and then add small sticks and bigger sticks befor e you
feed y our tr ee stump into the blaze. Because it’s the small
sparks, which start small ﬁr es, that eventually build enough
heat to bur n the whole fucking for est  down.
If you don’t have any big accomplishments to draw on yet,
so b e it. Y our  small victories ar e your cookies to s avor, and
mak e sur e you do savor them. Y eah, I was har d on myself
when I look ed in the A cco untability Mir r or, but I also praised
myself when ever I could claim a small victory, be cause we
all  need that, and very few o f us tak e the time to cel ebrate
our su ccesses. Sur e, in the moment, we might enjoy them,
but do  we ever look back on them and feel that w in again
and again? Maybe that sounds nar cissistic to you. But I’m
not talking about bullshitt ing about the glory days her e. I’m
not suggestin g you crawl up your own ass and b or e your
friends with all your stories about what a badass you used
to be . Nobody wants to hear that shit. I’m talking ab out
utilizing past successes to  fuel you to new and bigger ones.
Because in the heat of battle, when shit gets r eal,  we need
to draw inspiration to push thr ough our own e xhaustion,
depr ession, pain, and mis ery . W e need to spark a bunch of
small ﬁr es to become the motherfucking  infer no .
But dig ging into the Cookie Jar when things ar e going south
tak es focus and deter mination because at ﬁrst the brain
doesn’t want  to go ther e.  It wants to r emind you that you’r e
suﬀering and that your goal is impossible. It wants to stop
you so it can  stop the pain. That night in San Diego was the
most d iﬃcult night of my life, physically . I’d never felt so
br ok en, and ther e wer e no souls to tak e. I wasn’t competing
for a tr ophy . Ther e was no one standing in my way . All I had
to draw on to k eep myself going was  me.The Cookie Jar became m y ener gy bank. Whenever the pain
got to be too much, I dug into it and took a bite. The pain
was never gone, but I only felt it in waves because my brain
was otherwise occupied, w hich allowed me to dr own out the
simple questions and shrink time. Each lap became a victory
lap, celebrating a diﬀer ent cookie, another small ﬁr e. Mile
eighty - one  became eighty - two , an d a n hour and a half la ter,
I was in the nineties. I’d  run ninety fucking miles with no
training! Who does that shit? An hour later I was at ninety -
ﬁve , and af ter nearly nineteen hours of running almost non -
stop , I’d  done it ! I’d hit one  hundr ed miles! Or had I? I
couldn’t r emember, so I ran one mor e lap just to mak e  sur e.
A f ter running 101 miles, my race ﬁnally over, I stagger ed to
my lawn chair and K ate p laced a camouﬂaged poncho liner
over my body as I shiver ed in the fog. Steam pour ed oﬀ me.
My vision was blur r ed. I r emember feeling something war m
on my leg, look ed down and saw I was pissing blood again. I
knew what was coming ne xt, but the port - a - potties  wer e
about forty feet away, which may as well have been forty
miles, or 4,000. I tried to get up but I was way too dizzy and
collapsed back into that chair, an immovable objec t r eady to
accept the inevitable truth that I was about to shit myself . It
was much worse this tim e. My entir e backside and lower
back wer e smear ed with war m  feces.
K ate knew what an emer gency look ed lik e. She sprinted to
our T oyota Camry and back ed the car up on the grassy knoll
beside me. My legs wer e stiﬀ as fossils fr ozen in stone, and I
leaned on her to slide into the backseat. She was frantic
behind the wheel and wanted to tak e me dir ectly t o the ER,
but I wanted to go  home.
W e liv ed on the second deck of an apartment comple x in
Chula V ista, and I leaned on her back with my ar ms ar ound
her neck as she led me up that stair case. She bala nced meup against the stucco as she opened the door to our
apartment. I took a few steps inside befor e blacking  out.
I ca me to, on  the kitchen ﬂoor, a few minutes later . My back
was st ill smear ed with shit, my thighs cak ed in blood and
urine. My feet wer e blis ter ed up and bleeding in twelve
places. Seven of my ten toenails wer e dangling loose,
connected on ly by tabs of dead skin. W e had a combination
tub and shower and sh e got the shower going befor e
helping me crawl towar d  the bathr oom and climb into the
tub. I r emember lying ther e, nak ed, with the shower pouring
down upon me. I shiver e d, felt and look ed lik e de ath, and
then I starte d peeing again. But instead of blood or urine,
what came out of me look ed lik e thick br own  bile.
P etriﬁed, K ate stepped in to the hall to dial my mom. She’d
been to the r ace with a fr iend of hers who happened to be a
doctor . When he hear d my symptoms, the doctor suggested
that I might be in kidney failur e and that I needed to go to
the ER immediately . K ate hung up, stor med into the
bathr oom, an d found me lying on my lef t side, in the fetal
position.
“W e need to get you to the ER now, David!”
She k ept talking, shouting, crying, trying to r each me
thr ough the haze, and I hear d most of what she said, but I
knew if we w ent to the hospital they’d give me pa in killers
and I didn’t want to mask this pain. I’d just accomplished
the most amazing feat in  my entir e life. It was har der than
Hell W eek, mor e signiﬁca nt to me than becoming a SEAL,
and mor e challenging than my deployment to Iraq because
this time I h ad done something I’m not sur e anyone had
ever done befor e. I ran 101 miles with zer o  pr eparation.I knew then that I’d been selling myself short. That ther e
was a whole new level of perfor mance out ther e to tap into .
That the human body can withstand and accomplish a hell
of a lot mor e than most o f us think possible, and that it all
begins and ends in the m ind. This wasn’t a theory . It wasn’t
something I’d r ead in a d amn book. I’d e xperienced it ﬁrst
hand on Hospitality  P oint.
This last part. This pain and suﬀering. This was my tr ophy
cer emony . I’d ear ned this. This was conﬁr mation that I’d
master ed my  own mind—at least for a little while—and that
what I ’d just  accomplishe d was something special . As I lay
ther e, curled up in the tub, shivering in the fetal position,
r elishing the pain, I thought of something else too . If I could
run 10 1 miles with zer o training, imagine what I could do
with a little  pr eparation.C H A L L E N G E  # 6
T ak e in ventory of your Cookie Jar . Crack your jour nal open
again. W rite it all out. R e member, this is not some br eezy
str oll thr ough your personal tr ophy r oom. Don’t just write
down your achievement hit list. Include life obstacles you’ve
over come as well, lik e quitting smoking or over coming
depr ession or a stutter . A dd in those minor tasks you failed
earlier in life, but tried again a second or thir d time and
ultimately succeeded at. F eel what it was lik e to over come
those struggles, those opponents, and win. Then get to
work.
Set ambitious goals befor e each work out and let those past
victories car r y you to new  personal bests. If it’s a run or bik e
ride, include some time to do interval work and challenge
yourself to beat your best mile split. Or simply maintain a
maximum heart rate for a full minute, then two minutes. If
you’r e at home, focus on pull - ups  or push - ups . Do as many
as pos sible in two minutes. Then try to beat your best.
When the pain hits and tries to stop you short of y our goal,
dunk your ﬁst in, pull out a cookie, and let it fuel  you!
If you’r e mor e focused on intellectual gr owth, train yourself
to study har der and longer than ever befor e, or r ead a
r ecor d number of books in a given month. Y our Cookie Jar
can he lp ther e too . Because if you perfor m this challenge
cor r ectly and  truly challenge yourself, you’ll come to a point
in a ny e x er cise wher e pain, bor edom, or self - doubt  kicks in,
and yo u’ll need to push b ack to get thr ough it. The Cookie
Jar is your shortcut to taking contr ol of your own thought
pr ocess. Use it that way! The point her e isn’t to mak e
yourself feel lik e a her o f or the fuck of it. It’s not a hooray -for - me  session. It’s to r emembe r what a badass you ar e  so
you can use that ener gy to succeed again in th e heat of
battle!
P ost yo ur me mories and the new successes they fueled on
social media, and include the hashtags: #canthurtme
#cookiejar .C H A P T E R  S E V E N
7 .  THE MOST POWERFUL
WEAPON
T WENTY - SEVEN  HOURS  AF TER  S A V ORING  INTENSE , GR A TIFYING  P AIN  AND  BASKING
in the af ter g low of my g r eatest achievement so far, I was
back at my desk on a Monday mor ning. SB G was my
commanding oﬃcer, and I had his per mission, and every
known e x cuse, to tak e a few days oﬀ. Instead, swollen, sor e,
and m iserable, I pulled myself out of bed, hobbled into work,
and later that mor ning called Chris  K ostman.
I’d b een looking forwar d to this. I imagined the swe et note of
surprise in his voice, af ter hearing that I’d tak en his
challenge and run 101 miles in less than twenty - four  hours.
P er haps ther e’d even be some over due r espect as  he made
my entry to Badwater oﬃcial. Instead, my call went to
voicemail. I lef t him a polite message he never r etur ned, and
two days later I dr opped him an  email.
Sir, how ar e you doing? I ran the one hundr ed miles
needed to qualif y in 18 hours and 56 minutes…I would
lik e to know now what I need to do to get into Badwater…
so we can begin raising money for the [Special Operations
W ar rior] foundation. Thanks  again…
His r eply came in the ne x t day, and it thr ew me way the fuck
oﬀ.Congrats on your hundr ed - mile  ﬁnish. But did you actually
stop then? The point of a twenty - four - hour  event is to run
for twenty - four  hours…Anyway…stay tuned for the
announcement that you can apply…The race will be July
24–26.
Best  r egar ds,
Chris K ostman
I c ouldn’t help but tak e his r esponse personally . On a
W ednesday h e suggested I run one hundr ed miles in twenty -
four  hours that Satur day . I got it done in less time than he
r equir ed, and he still wasn’t impr essed? K ostman was a
veteran of ultra races, s o he knew that str ewn b ehind me
wer e a dozen perfor mance bar riers and pain thr esholds I’d
shatter ed. Obviously, none of that meant much to  him.
I cooled oﬀ f or a week befor e I wr ote him back, and in the
meantime look ed into other races to bolster my r esume.
Ther e wer e very few avai lable that late in the year . I found a
ﬁf ty - miler  o n Catalina, but only trip le digits would impr ess a
guy lik e K ost man. Plus, it had been a full week since the San
Diego One Day and my body was still monumentally fuck ed.
I hadn’t run thr ee feet since ﬁnishing mile 101. My
frustration ﬂashed with the cursor as I craf ted my  r ebuttal.
Thanks for emailing me back. I see that you enjoy talking
about as much as I do . The only r eason why I’m still
bugging you is because this race and the cause behind it
is important…If you have any other qualif ying races that
you think I should do, please let me know…Thanks for
letting me know I’m supposed to run the full twenty - four
hours. Ne xt time I’ll be sur e to do  that.
It to ok him another full w eek to r espond, and he d idn’t oﬀer
a hell of a lot mor e hop e, but at least he salte d it withsar casm.
Hi  David,
If you can do some mor e ultras between now and Jan 3–
24, the application period, gr eat. If not, submit the best
possible application during the Jan 3–24 window and cr oss
your  ﬁngers.
Thanks for your  enthusiasm,
Chris
A t this point I was starting to lik e Chris K ostman a lot better
than m y chances of getting into Badwater . Wha t I didn’t
know, becau se he never mentioned it, is that K ostman was
one of ﬁve people on the Badwater admissions committee,
which r eviews upwar ds of 1,000 applications a year . Each
judge scor e s every application, and based on their
cumulative s cor es, the top ninety applicants get in on merit.
F r om t he sounds of it, m y r esume was thin and wouldn’t
crack t he top ninety . On the other hand, K ostman held ten
wild c ar ds in his back pock et. He could have alr eady
guaranteed me a spot, but for some r eason he k ept pushing
me. Once again I’d have t o pr ove myself beyond a minimum
standar d to get a fair shak e. T o become a SEAL, I had to deal
with thr ee Hell W eeks, and now, if I r eally wanted to run
Badwater and raise mone y for families in need, I was going
to have to ﬁnd a way to mak e my application  bulletpr oof .
Based on a link he sent along with his r eply, I f ound one
mor e ultra race schedule d befor e the Badwater application
was du e. It was called the Hurt 100, and the name did not
lie. One of th e toughest 100- mile  trail races in the world, it
was set in a triple canopy rainfor est on the island of Oahu. T o
cr oss the ﬁnish line, I’d have to run up and dow n 24,500
vertical feet. That’s some  Himalayan shit. I star ed a t the racepr oﬁle. It was all sharp spik es and deep dives. It look ed lik e
an ar r h ythmic EKG. I couldn’t do this race cold. Ther e’s no
way I could ﬁnish it without at least some training, but by
early D ecember I was still in so much agony that walking up
the stairs to my apartment was pur e  tortur e.
The fo llowing week end I zoomed up Interstate 15  to V egas
for the  Las V egas Marathon. It wasn’t spur of the moment.
Months befo r e I’d ever hear d the wor ds “San Diego One
Day,” K ate, my mom, and  I had cir cled December 5th on our
calendars. It  was 2005, the ﬁrst year that the L as V egas
Marathon started on the Strip, and we wanted to be part of
that sh it. Ex cept I never trained for it, then the San Diego
One D ay hap pened, and by the time we got to V egas I had
no illus ions about my ﬁtness level. I tried to run the mor ning
befor e we lef t, but I still h ad str ess fractur es in my feet, my
medial tendons wer e wob bly, and even while wrapped with a
special bandage I’d found that could stabilize my  ankles, I
couldn’t last longer than a quarter mile. So I didn’t plan on
running as we r ock ed up to the Mandalay Bay Casino &
R esort on race  day .
It was a beautiful mor nin g. Music was pumping, ther e wer e
thousands of smiling face s in the str eet, the clean desert air
had a chill to  it, and the sun was shining. R unning conditions
don’t get much better, a nd K ate was r eady to go . Her goal
was to br eak ﬁve hours, and for once, I was satisﬁed being a
cheerleader . My mom had always planned on walking it, and
I ﬁ gur ed I’d s tr oll with her for as long as I could, then hail a
cab to the ﬁnish line and cheer my ladies to the  tape.
The thr ee of us toed up with the masses as the clock struck 7
a.m., and someone got on  the mic to begin the oﬃcial count
down. “T en…nine…eight …” When he hit one, a hor n
sounded, and lik e P avlov’s dog something click ed inside me.
I still don’t know what it was. P er haps I under estimated mycompetitive s pirit. Maybe  it was because I knew Navy SEALs
wer e s upposed to be the har dest motherfuck ers in the world.
W e wer e supposed to run  on br ok en legs and fract ur ed feet.
Or so went th e legend I’d bought into long ago . Whatever it
was, something trigger ed and the last thing I r emember
seeing as the hor n echoe d down the str eet was shock and
r eal co ncer n on the faces of K ate and my mother as I
char ged down the boulevar d and out of  sight.
The pa in was serious for the ﬁrst quarter mile, but  af ter that
adr enaline took over . I hit the ﬁrst mile mark er at  7:10 and
k ept running  lik e the asphalt was melting behind me. T en
kilometers into the race, my time was ar ound forty - thr ee
minutes. Tha t’s solid, but I wasn’t focused on the clock
because considering how I’d felt the day befor e, I w as still in
total disbelief that I’d actually run 6.2 miles! My body was
br ok en. How was this happening? Most people in my
condition wo uld have both feet in sof t casts, and her e I was
running a  marathon!
I go t to mile thirteen, the  half way point, and saw t he oﬃcial
clock. It r ead, “1:35:55.” I did the math and r eali zed that I
was in  the hunt to qualif y for the Boston marathon, but was
right o n the cusp. In or de r to qualif y in my age gr oup, I had
to ﬁnish in under 3:10:59. I laughed in disbelief and slammed
a pape r cup of Gatorade. In less than two hours the game
had ﬂipped, and I might never get this chance again. I’d seen
so much death by then —in my personal life and on the
battleﬁeld—that I knew tomor r ow was not gu aranteed.
Befor e me was an opp ortunity, and if you give me an
opportunity, I will br eak that motherfuck er  oﬀ!
It was n’t easy . I’d surfed an adr enaline wave for the ﬁrst
thirteen mile s, but I felt every inch of the second half, and at
mile e ighteen, I hit a w all. That’s a common theme in
marathon running, because mile eighteen is usually when arunner’s glycogen levels run low, and I was bonking, my
lungs heavin g. My legs felt lik e I was running in deep
Saharan sand. I needed  to stop and tak e a br eak, but I
r efused, and two har d mil es later I felt r ejuvenated. I r eached
the ne xt clock at mile twenty - two . I was still in the hunt fo r
Boston, though I’d fallen thirty seconds oﬀ the pace, and to
qualif y, the ﬁnal four miles would have to be my very  best.
I dug deep, kick ed my thighs up high, and lengthened my
stride. I was a man possessed as I tur ned the ﬁnal cor ner and
char ged towar d the ﬁnish line at the Mandalay Bay .
Thousands of people h ad assembled on the sidewalk,
cheering. It was all a beautiful blur to me as I sprinted  home.
I ran my last two miles at a sub - seven - minute  pace, ﬁnished
the race in just over 3:08, and qualiﬁed fo r Boston.
Somewher e on the str eets  of Las V egas, my wife and mother
would deal with their ow n struggles and over come them to
ﬁnish t oo, and as I sat on a patch of grass, waiting for them, I
contemplated another simple question I couldn’t shak e. It
was a new one, and wasn’t fear - based , pain - spik ed , or self -
limiting . This one felt  open.
What am I capable  of?
SEAL training  had pushed me to the brink several times, but
whenever it beat me down I popped up to tak e another
pounding. Th at e xperience made me har d, but it also lef t me
wanting mor e of the sam e, and day - to - day  Na vy SEAL life
just wasn’t lik e that. Then came the San Diego One  Day, and
now th is. I’d ﬁnished a marathon at an elite pa ce (for a
week end war rior) when I had no business even walking a
mile. Both wer e incr edible physical feats that didn’t seem
possible. But they’d  happened.
What am I capable  of?I couldn’t answer that question, but as I look ed ar ound the
ﬁnish line that day and co nsider ed what I’d accomplished, it
became clear that we ar e all leaving a lot of money on the
table without r ealizing it.  W e habitually settle for less than
our best; at w ork, in school, in our r elationships, a nd on the
playing ﬁeld or race course. W e settle as individuals, and we
teach o ur chi ldr en to settle for less than their best,  and all of
that ripples out, mer g es, and multiplies w ithin our
communities and society as a whole. W e’r e not talking some
bad we ek end in V egas, no mor e cash at the A TM kind of loss
either . In that moment, the cost of missing out on  so much
e x cellence in this eter nally fuck ed - up  world  felt incalculable
to me,  and it still does. I haven’t stopped thinkin g about it
since.
* * *
Physically, I bounced ba ck fr om V egas within a few days.
Meaning I was back to my new nor mal: dealing with the
same serious  yet tolerable pain I’d come home to af ter the
San Diego One Day . Th e aches wer e still ther e by the
following Satur day, but I was done convalescing. I needed to
start tr aining or I’d bur n o ut on the trail during the  Hurt 100,
and ther e would be no Ba dwater . I’d been r eading up on how
to pr ep ar e fo r ultras and knew it was vital to get in some
hundr ed - mile  we eks. I onl y had about a month to build my
str ength and endurance befor e race day on January  14th.
My feet and shins wer en’t even close to right, so I came up
with a new method to stabilize both the bones in my feet and
my tendons. I bought high perfor mance inserts, cut them
down to ﬁt ﬂ ush with the soles of my feet, and taped my
ankles, heels, and lower shins with compr ession tape. I also
slid a small h eel wedge into my shoes to cor r ect my running
postur e and ease pr essur e. A f ter what I’d endur ed, it took a
lot of pr ops to get me running (nearly) pain  fr ee.Getting hundr ed - mile  weeks  in while holding down a steady
job isn’t easy, but that was no e x cuse. My sixteen - mile
commute to work fr om C hula V ista to Cor onado became my
go - to  run. Chula V ista had a split personality when I lived
ther e. Ther e was the nicer, newer, middle class section,
wher e we lived, which was sur r ounded by a concr ete jungle
of gritty, danger ous str eets. That’s the part I ran thr ough at
dawn, benea th fr eeway overpasses, and alongside Home
Depot shipping bays. This was not your tourist br ochur e’s
version of sunny San  Diego .
I sniﬀed car e xhaust and r otting garbage, spotted skittering
rats, and dodged sleeples s homeless camps befor e  r eaching
Imperial Beach, wher e I  pick ed up the seven - mile  Silver
Strand bik e path. It bank ed south past Cor onado’s landmark
hotel, the tur n of the cent ury Hotel Del Cor onado, and a cr op
of luxury condo towers wh ich overlook ed the same wide strip
of sand shar ed by Naval Special W arfar e Comman d, wher e I
spent the day jumping out of airplanes and shooting guns. I
was living the Navy SEAL legend, trying to k eep it  r eal!
I r an that sixteen - mile  s tr etch at le ast thr ee times a week.
Some days I ran home too, and on F ridays I added a ruck
run. Inside the radio pouch of my standar d issue ruck sack, I
slid two twenty - ﬁve - pound  weigh ts and  ran fully lo aded for
as many as twenty mile s to build quad str ength. I loved
waking up at 5 a.m. and  starting work with thr ee hours of
car dio alr ead y in the bank while most of my teammates
hadn’t even ﬁnished their  coﬀee. It gave me a mental edge,
a better sense of self - awar eness , and a ton of self -
conﬁdence , which made me a better SEAL instructor . That’s
what getting up at the ass crack of dawn and putting out will
do for you. It mak es you better in all facets of your  life.
During my ﬁrst r eal dea l week of training, I ran  seventy -
seven  miles.  The following week, I ran 109 miles, including atwelve - mile  run on Chris tmas Day . The ne xt week I pushed it
to 111.5, including a nineteen - mile  run on New Y ear’s Day,
and th e follow ing week I b ack ed oﬀ to taper my leg s, but still
got 56 .5 miles in. All of those wer e r oad miles, but what I had
coming up was a trail ru n, and I had never run on a trail
befor e. I’d bushwhack ed a bunch, but I hadn’t run  distance
on single track with a clock running. The Hurt 100 was a
twenty - mile  cir cuit course, and I’d hear d that only a slim
slice o f those  who start th e race ﬁnish all ﬁve laps . This was
my last chance to pad my Badwater r esume. I had a lot
riding on a successful o utcome, and ther e was  so much
about the race, and about ultra running, that I still didn’t
know .Hurt 100 W eek 3 training log
I ﬂ ew into H onolulu a few days early and check e d into the
Halek oa, a military hotel wher e active duty and veterans
stay with their families w hen they come thr ough town. I’d
studied the maps and kn ew the basics when it came to the
ter rain, but I hadn’t seen it up close, so I dr ove o ver to the
Hawaii Natur e Center the day befor e the race and star ed into
the ve lvety, jade mountains. All I could see was a  steep cut
of r ed earth disappearing  into the dense gr een. I walk ed up
the trail for a  half mile, bu t ther e was only so far I could hik e.I w as tapering, and the ﬁrst mile was straight uphill.
Everything b eyond that would have to r emain a mystery for
a little  longer .
Ther e wer e just thr ee aid stations on the twenty - mile  course,
and most athletes wer e self - r eliant  an d dialed i n their own
nutritional r egimen. I was  still a neophyte, and had no clue
what I needed when it came to fuel. I met a wom an at the
hotel a t 5:30  a.m. on race  day mor ning as we wer e  about to
leave. She knew I was a r ookie and ask ed what I’ d br ought
with m e to k eep myself going. I showed her my meager
stash of ﬂavor ed ener gy gels, and my  CamelBak.
“Y ou didn’t bring salt pills ?” she ask ed, shock ed. I s hrugged. I
didn’t know what the fuck a salt pill was. She pour ed a
hundr ed of them into my  palm. “T ak e two of the se, every
hour . They’ll k eep you fr om  cramping.”
“ R oger that.”  She smiled and shook her head lik e she could
see my fuck ed - up  futur e.
I ha d a str ong  start and fe lt gr eat, but not long af ter the race
began I knew I was facing a monster course. I’m not talking
about the grade and elev ation variance. I e xpected that. It
was al l the r ocks and r oots that took me by surprise. I was
luck y that it hadn’t rained in a couple of days because all I
had to wear wer e my st andar d running shoes, which had
pr ecious little tr ead. Then my CamelBak br ok e at mile  six.
I shoo k it oﬀ and k ept hammering, but withou t a water
sour ce, I’d have to r ely on the aid stations to hydrate, and
they wer e spaced miles a part. I didn’t even have m y support
cr ew (of one) yet. K ate w as chilling on the beach and didn’t
plan on showing up until later in the race, which was was my
own fault. I enticed he r to come along by pr omising a
vacation, and  early that mor ning I insisted she enjoy Hawaii
and le ave the suﬀering to me. W ith or without a CamelBak,my mindset was to mak e  it fr om aid station to aid station
and see what  happens.
Befor e the race started I hear d people talking about K arl
Meltzer . I’d seen him str etching out and war ming up. His
nickname wa s the Speedgoat, and he was trying to become
the ﬁrst person ever to  complete the race in less than
twenty - four  h ours . F or the r est of us ther e was a thirty - six
hour time limit. My ﬁrst la p took four and a half hours, and I
felt ok ay af terwar ds, which was to be e xpected considering
all the long days I’d done in pr eparation, but I was also
concer ned because each lap demanded an ascent and
descent of ar ound 5,000  vertical feet, and the amount of
focus it took to pay attent ion to every step so I didn’t tur n an
ankle amped up my mental fatigue. Each time my medial
tendon twing ed it felt lik e  a raw nerve e xposed to  the wind,
and I knew o ne stumble could fold my wobbly ankl e and end
my race. I felt that pr essur e every single moment, and as a
r esult, I bur ned mor e cal ories than e xpected. Wh ich was a
pr oblem bec ause I had very little fuel, and without a water
sour ce, I couldn’t hydrate  eﬀectively .
Between laps, I guzzled water, and with my belly sloshing
started my second loop, with a slow jog up that one - mile -
long , 800- foot  climb into the mountains (basically straight
uphill). That’s when it started to rain. Our r ed earth trail
became mud  within minutes. The soles of my sh oes wer e
coated with it and slick as skis. I sloshed thr ough shin deep
puddles, skidded down descents, and slipped on ascents. It
was a full - body  sport. But at least ther e was water .
Whenever I was dry I tip ped my head back, opened wide,
and tasted the rain, which ﬁlter ed thr ough a triple canopy
jungle that smelled of leaf r ot and shit. The fer al funk of
fertility invaded my nostrils, and all I could think of was the
fact that I had to run four mor e fucking  laps!A t mile thirty, my body r eported some positive news. Or
maybe it was the physical manifestation of a backhanded
compliment? The tendon pain in my ankles had vanished…
because my feet had swollen enough to stabilize those
tendons. W as this a good thing long - ter m ? P r oba bly no t, but
you tak e what you can g et on the ultra cir cuit, wher e you
have t o r oll with whatever gets you fr om mile to mile.
Meanwhile, my quads and calves ached lik e they’d been
thumped with a sledgehammer . Y eah, I had done a lot of
running, but most of it—including my ruck runs—on pancak e
ﬂat ter rain in San Diego, not on slick jungle  trails.
K ate was waiting for me by the time I completed my second
lap, an d af ter spending a r elaxing mor ning on W aikiki beach,
she watched  in hor r or as  I materialized fr om the m ist lik e a
zombie fr om  the W alking Dead. I sat and guzzled as much
water as I co uld. By then, wor d had gotten out that  it was my
ﬁrst trail  race.
Have you ever had a very public fuck - up , or wer e in the
midst of a s hitty day/we ek/month/year, yet people ar ound
you felt obliged to comment on the sour ce of your
humiliation? Maybe they r eminded you of all the ways you
could have ensur ed a very diﬀer ent outcome? Now imagine
consuming that negativity, but having to run sixty mor e
miles i n the sweaty, jungl e rain on top of it. Does t hat sound
lik e fun? Y eah, I was the talk of the race. W ell, me  and K arl
Meltzer . Nobody could b elieve he was gunning for a sub -
twenty - four - hour  e xper ience, and it was equally baﬄing that
I showed up to one of the most tr eacher ous trail races on the
planet, undersupplied and unpr epar ed, with no t rail races
under my belt. By the time I began my thir d loop ther e wer e
only forty athletes, out of  nearly a hundr ed, lef t in the race,
and I started running with a guy named L uis Escob ar . F or the
tenth time I hear d the following  wor ds:“So it’s your ﬁrst trail rac e?” he ask ed. I nodded. “ Y ou r eally
pick ed the  wr ong…”
“I know,” I  said.
“It’s just such a  technical…”
“ Right. I’m a fucking idiot. I’ve hear d that a lot  today .”
“That’s ok ay,” he said, “ we’r e all of bunch of idiots  out her e,
man.” He handed me a w ater bottle. He was car rying thr ee
of them. “T ak e this. I hear d about your  CamelBak.”
This being my second rac e, I was starting to unde rstand the
r hythm of ultra. It’s a constant dance between competition
and camaraderie, which r eminded me of BUD/S. L uis and I
wer e both racing the clo ck and each other, but w e wanted
one another to mak e it. W e wer e in it alone, together, and he
was right. W e wer e a couple of fucking  idiots.
Darkness descended and lef t us with a pitch - black  jungle
night. R unnin g side by side, the glow of our headlamps
mer ged and shed a wider light, but once we separated all I
could see was a yellow ball bouncing on the trail  ahead of
me. Countless trip wir es— shin - high  logs, slick r oots, lichen -
wrapped  r ocks—r ema ined out of sight. I slipped, stumbled ,
fell, and cursed. Jungle noises wer e everywher e. It wasn’t
just the insect world that had my attention. In Haw aii, on all
the isl ands, bow hunting  for wild pig in the mountains is a
major pastime, and maste r hunters of ten leave their pit bulls
chained up in the jungle to develop a nose for swine. I hear d
every o ne of those hungry bulls snapping and gr owling, and I
hear d some pigs squealing too . I smelled their fear and rage,
their piss and shit, their sour fucking  br eath.
W ith each nearby bark or yelp, my heart skipped and I
jumped on ter rain so slick that injury was a r eal possibility .One w r ong step could r oll my ass out of the race a nd out of
contention for Badwater . I could pictur e K ostman hearing the
news a nd nodding lik e he ﬁgur ed that shit would happen all
along. I know him pr etty well now, and he was never out to
get me, but that’s how my mind work ed back then. And in
the steep, dark mountains of Oahu, my e xhaustion magniﬁed
my str ess. I felt close to my absolute limit, but still had mor e
than forty miles to  go!
On the backside of the co urse, af ter a long technical descent
into the dark, dank for est I saw another headlamp cir cling
ahead of me in a cutout on the trail. The runner was moving
in curlicues and when I caught up to him I could see it was a
Hungarian runner I’d met in San Diego named Ak os K onya.
He wa s one of the best runners in the ﬁeld on H ospitality
P oint, wher e  he cover ed 134 miles in twenty - four  hours. I
lik ed Ak os and had mad  r espect for him. I sto pped and
watched him move in conjoining cir cles, covering the same
ter rain over and over again. W as he looking for something?
W as he  hallucinating?
“ Ak os,” I ask ed, “ you ok ay, man? Do you need some  help?”
“ David, no! I…no, I’m ﬁne,” he said. His eyes wer e full - moon
ﬂying saucers. He was in delirium, but I was bar ely hanging
on m yself and wasn’t sur e  what I could do for him other than
tell staﬀ at the ne xt aid station he was wandering in a daze.
Lik e I said, ther e’s camaraderie and ther e’s competition on
the ultra cir cuit, and sin ce he wasn’t in obvious pain and
r efused my help, I had to go into barbarian mode . W ith two
full laps to go, I had no choice but to k eep  moving.
I s tagger ed back to the start line and slumped into  my chair,
dazed. It was dark as space, the temperatur e was dr opping,
and rain was still pissing down. I was at the very edge of my
capability, an d wasn’t sur e that I could tak e one mor e step. I
felt lik e I’d drained 99 per cent fr om my tank, at least. My gaslight was on, my engine shuddering, yet I knew I had to ﬁnd
mor e i f I was going to ﬁ nish this race and get m yself into
Badwater .
But ho w do you push yourself when pain is all you feel with
every step? When agony is the feedback loop that
per meates each cell in your body, begging you to stop?
That’s trick y because the thr eshold for suﬀering is diﬀer ent
for everybody . What’s universal is the impulse to succumb.
T o feel  lik e you’ve given everything you can, and that you
ar e justiﬁed in leaving a job  undone.
By now , I’m sur e you can tell that it doesn’t tak e much for
me to become obsessed. Some criticize my level of passion,
but I’m not down with the pr evailing mentalities that tend to
dominate American society these days; the ones t hat tell us
to g o w ith the ﬂow or invite us to lear n how to get mor e with
less eﬀort. F uck that shortcut bullshit. The r eason I embrace
my own obsessions and demand and desir e mor e of myself is
because I’ve  lear ned that it’s only when I push be yond pain
and suﬀering, past my per ceived limitations, that I’m
capable of accomplishing  mor e, physically and mentally—in
endurance races but also in life as a  whole.
And I believe the same is true for  you.
The hu man b ody is lik e a stock car . W e may look diﬀer ent on
the outside, but under th e hood we all have huge r eservoirs
of pote ntial and a gover nor impeding us fr om r eaching our
maximum velocity . In a car, the gover nor limits the ﬂow of
fuel and air so it doesn’t bur n too hot, which places a ceiling
on perfor mance. It’s a har dwar e issue; the gover nor can
easily be r emoved, and if  you disable yours, watch your car
r ock et beyond 130  mph.
It’s a subtler pr ocess in the human  animal.Our go ver nor is buried deep in our minds, intertwined with
our very identity . It know s what and who we love and hate;
it’s r ea d our whole life story and for ms the wa y we see
ourselves and how we’d lik e to be seen. It’s the sof twar e that
delivers pers onalized feedback—in the for m of pain and
e xhaustion, but also fear  and insecurity, and it uses all of
that to  encou rage us to s top befor e we risk it all. But, her e’s
the thing, it doesn’t have absolute contr ol. Unlik e the
gover nor in an engine, ours can’t stop us unless we buy into
its bullshit and agr ee to  quit.
Sadly, most of us give up when we’ve only given ar ound 40
per cent of our maximum eﬀort. Even when we feel lik e we’ve
r eached our absolute limi t, we still have 60 per cent mor e to
give! That’s the gover nor  in action! Once you kno w that to
be true, it’s simply a matter of str etching your pain
tolerance, let ting go of yo ur identity and all your self - limiting
stories, so you can get to 60 per cent, then 80 per cent and
beyond without giving up . I call this The 40% R ule, and the
r eason it’s so powerful is that if you follow it, you w ill unlock
your mind to new levels of perfor mance and e x cellence in
sports and in life, and yo ur r ewar ds will run far deeper than
mer e material  success.
The 40% R ule can be app lied to everything we do . Because
in life almost  nothing will tur n out e xactly as we hope. Ther e
ar e al ways challenges, and whether we ar e at work or
school, or feeling tested within our most intimate or
important r elationships, we will all be tempted to w alk away
fr om c ommitments, give up on our goals and dr e ams, and
sell our own happiness sh ort at some point. Because we will
feel em pty, lik e we have no mor e to give, when we haven’t
tapped even half of the t r easur e buried deep in our minds,
hearts, and  souls.I know how it  feels to be appr oaching an ener getic dead end.
I’ve been ther e too many  times to count. I under stand the
temptation t o sell short, but I also know that i mpulse is
driven by your mind’s desir e for comfort, and it’s not telling
you the truth. It’s your id entity trying to ﬁnd sanctuary, not
help y ou gr ow . It’s looking for status quo, not r eaching for
gr eatness or seeking wholeness. But the sof twar e update
that you need to shut yo ur gover nor down is no s upersonic
download. It tak es twen ty years to gain twenty years of
e xperience, and the onl y way to move beyond your 40
per cent is to callous your  mind, day af ter day . Wh ich means
you’ll have to chase pain lik e it’s your damn  job!
Imagine you’r e a bo x er, and on your ﬁrst day in the ring you
tak e on e on your chin. It’s gonna hurt lik e fucking hell, but at
year ten of being a bo x er, you won’t be stopped by one
punch. Y ou’ll be able to ab sorb twelve r ounds of getting beat
the fuck down and come  back the very ne xt day  and ﬁght
again. It’s not that the pu nch has lost power . Y our opponents
will be  even str onger . The  change has happened within your
brain. Y ou’ve calloused your mind. Over a period  of time,
your tolerance for mental and physical suﬀering will have
e xpanded because your sof twar e will have lear ned that you
can tak e a hell of a lot mo r e than one punch, and i f you stay
with any task that is trying to beat you down, you will r eap
r ewar ds.
Not a ﬁghter ? Say you li k e to run but have a br ok en pink y
toe. I’ll  bet if you continue running on it, pr etty soon you’ll be
able to  run on br ok en leg s. Sounds impossible, right? I know
it’s true, because I’ve run on br ok en legs, and that
knowledge h elped me endur e all manner of agonies on the
ultra c ir cuit, which has  r evealed a clear spring of self
conﬁdence that I drink fr om whenever my tank is  dry .But nobody taps their r es erve 60 per cent right away or all at
once. The ﬁrst step is to r emember that your initi al blast of
pain an d fatigue is your g over nor talking. Once you do that,
you ar e in contr ol of the d ialogue in your mind, and you can
r emind yourself that you ar e not as drained as you think.
That y ou haven’t given it your all. Not even close. Buying
into th at will k eep you in the ﬁght, and that’s worth an e xtra
5 per cent. Of course, that’s easier r ead than  done.
It was n’t easy to begin the fourth lap of the Hurt 100
because I knew how much it would hurt, and when you ar e
feeling dead and buried, dehydrated, wrung out, and tor n
the fuc k up at 40 per cent, ﬁnding that e xtra 60 per cent feels
impossible. I didn’t want my suﬀering to continue. Nobody
does! That’s why the line “ fatigue mak es cowar ds of us all” is
true as  shit.
Mind you, I d idn’t know anything about The 40%  R ule that
day . The Hurt 100 is whe n I ﬁrst started to contemplate it,
but I had hit the wall many times befor e, and I had lear ned to
stay pr esent and open minded enough to r ecalibrate my
goals e ven a t my lowest. I knew that staying in the ﬁght is
always the har dest, and most r ewar ding, ﬁrst  step.
Of cou rse, it’s easy to be open minded when you leave yoga
class and ar e taking a st r oll by the beach, but wh en you’r e
suﬀering, k ee ping an open mind is har d work. The same is
true if you ar e facing a daunting challenge on the job or at
school. Maybe you ar e tackling a hundr ed - question  test and
know that you’ve brick e d the ﬁrst ﬁf ty . A t that point, it’s
e xtr emely di ﬃcult to maintain the necessary dis cipline to
for ce y ourself to k eep taking the test seriously . It’s also
imperative th at you ﬁnd it because in every failur e ther e is
something to  be gained, even if it’s only practice for the ne xt
test yo u’ll have to tak e. Because that ne xt test is coming.
That’s a  guarantee.I did n’t start my fourth lap with any sort of conviction. I was
in wait - and - see  mode, and half way up that ﬁrst climb I
became so dizzy I had to sit under a tr ee for a while. T wo
runners passed me, one  at a time. They check ed in but I
waved them on. T old them I was just  ﬁne.
Y eah, I was doing gr eat. I was a r egular Ak os  K onya.
F r om m y van tage point I c ould see the cr est of the  hill above
and encoura ged myself to walk at least that far . If I still
wanted to quit af ter that, I told myself that I would be willing
to sign oﬀ, and that ther e is no shame in not ﬁnishing the
Hurt 100. I said that to  myself again and again because
that’s how our gover nor works. It massages your  ego even
as i t stops you short of your goals. But once I got to the top
of the climb,  the higher g r ound gave me a new perspective
and I saw an other place oﬀ in the distance and decided to
cover that small str etch of mud, r ock, and r oot too—you
know, befor e quitting for  good.
Once I  got ther e I was sta ring down a long descent and even
though the footing was tr oubling, it still look ed much easier
than going uphill. W ithout r ealizing it, I’d gotten to a point
wher e I was able to strategize. On the ﬁrst climb , I was so
dizzy and weak I was swept into a moment of fuck, which
clogged my brain. Ther e  was no r oom for strate gy . I just
wanted to quit, but by moving a little bit further I’d r eset my
brain. I’d calmed down and r ealized I could chunk the race
down to size, and staying in the game lik e that  gave me
hope, and hope is  addictive.
I c hunk ed the race out th at way, collecting 5 per cent chips,
unlocking mo r e ener gy, then bur ning it up as time bled into
the we e hour s. I became so tir ed I damn near fell asleep on
my fe et, and that’s danger ous on a trail with so many
switchbacks and dr op oﬀs. Any runner could have easily
sleepwalk ed into oblivion. The one thing k eeping me awak ewas the piss - poor  t rail condition. I fell on m y ass dozens of
times. My str eet shoes we r e out of their element. I t felt lik e I
was running on ice, and the inevitable fall was always
jar ring, but at least it wok e me  up.
By run ning a  little while, t hen walking a str etch, I w as able to
for ge ahead to mile seventy - seven , the toughest descent of
them a ll, which is when I saw K arl Meltzer, the Speedgoat,
cr est t he hill  behind me. He wor e a lamp on his head and
another on his wrist, and a hip pack with two big water
bottles. Silhouetted in pink dawn light he char ged down
slope, navigating a section that had me stumbling and
gr oping for tr ee branches  to stay upright. He was about to
lap me , thr ee  miles fr om the ﬁnish line, on pace for a course
r ecor d, twenty - two  hours  and sixteen minutes, but what I
r emember most is how graceful he look ed runn ing at an
incr edible 6: 30 per mile pace. He was levitating over the
mud, riding a whole diﬀer ent Zen. His feet bar ely touched
the gr ound, and it was a beautiful fucking sight. The
Speedgoat was the living, br eathing answer to the question
that colonized my mind af ter the Las V egas  marathon.
What am I capable  of?
W atching that bad man glide acr oss the most challenging
ter rain made  me r ealize that ther e is a whole other level of
athlete out ther e in the world, and that some of that was
inside me too . In fact, it ’s in all of us. I’m not sa ying that
genetics don ’t play a r ol e in athletic perfor manc e, or that
everyone has an undiscover ed ability to run a four - minute
mile, dunk lik e L eBr on Jam es, shoot lik e Steph Cur ry, or run
the Hurt 100 in twenty - two  ho urs. W e don’t all have the
same ﬂoor or ceiling, but we each have a lot mor e in us than
we know, and when it co mes to endurance sports  lik e ultra
running, everyone can achieve feats they once  thought
impossible. In or der to do that we must change our minds,be willing to scrap our ide ntity, and mak e the e xtra eﬀort to
always ﬁnd mor e in or der to become  mor e.
W e must r emove our  gover nor .
That day on t he Hurt 100 cir cuit, af ter seeing Meltz er run lik e
a su per her o, I ﬁnished my  fourth lap in all kinds of pain and
took time to watch him celebrate, sur r ounded by his team.
He’d just achieved something nobody had ever done befor e
and her e I w as with another full lap to go . My legs wer e
rubber, my feet swollen. I did not want to go on, but I also
knew that was my pain talking. My true potentia l was still
undeter mined. L ooking back, I’d say I’d given 60 per cent,
which meant my tank was just shy of half - full .
I’d l ik e to sit her e and tell you I went all - out  and  d rained that
fuck er on lap ﬁve, but I was still a mer e tourist on planet
ultra. I wasn’t the master of my mind. I was in the laboratory,
still in discov ery mode, and I walk ed every single s tep of my
ﬁf th an d ﬁna l lap. It took  me eight hours, but the  rain had
stopped, the tr opical glo w of the war m Hawaiian sun felt
phenomenal, and I got the job done. I ﬁnished Hurt 100 in
thirty - thr ee  h ours  and twenty - thr ee  mi nutes, just shy of the
thirty - six - hour  cut oﬀ, good enough for ninth place. Only
twenty - thr ee  athlet es ﬁnished the entir e race, and I was one
of  them.
I was so thrashed af terwar d, two people car ried me to the
car, and K ate had to spin me up to my r oom in a damn
wheelchair . When we got ther e, we had mor e work to do . I
wanted to get my Badwater application done AS AP, so
without so much as a cat nap, we polished that shit  up.
W ithin a matter of days, K ostman emailed me to let  me know
that I had b een accepted into Badwater . It wa s a gr eat
feeling. It also meant tha t for the ne xt six months  I had two
full - time  job s. I was a Navy SEAL in full pr eparation mode f orBadwater . This time I would get strategic and speciﬁc
because I knew that in or der to unleash my best
perfor mance—if I wanted to blow past 40 per cent, drain my
tank, a nd tap  my full pot ential—I had to ﬁrst give myself an
opportunity .
I didn’ t r esear ch or pr epar e for the Hurt 100 well enough. I
hadn’t anticipated the r ough ter rain, I had no support cr ew
for the  ﬁrst part of the race, and I had no back - up  water
sour ce. I didn’t bring two headlamps, which would have
helped durin g the long, bleak night, and though I sur e felt
lik e I had given everythin g I had, I never even had a chance
to access my true 100  per cent.
Badwater was going to be diﬀer ent. I r esear ched day and
night. I studied the course, noted temperatur e and elevation
variances, and charted th em out. I wasn’t just inter ested in
the air temperatur e. I dril led down deeper so I kne w how hot
the pavement would be on the hottest Death V alley day ever .
I Goog led videos of the r ace and watched them for hours. I
r ead blogs fr om runners who completed it, noted their
pitfalls and training techn iques. I dr ove north to Death V alley
and e xplor ed the entir e  course.
Seeing the ter rain up close r evealed its brutality . The ﬁrst
forty - two  miles wer e dead ﬂat—a run thr ough God’s blast
fur nace crank ed up high. That would be my best o pportunity
to mak e gr eat time, but to survive it, I’d need two cr ew
vehicles to leap fr og one another and set up cooling stations
every thir d of a mile. The thought of it thrilled me, but then
again, I wasn’t living it ye t. I was listening to music , windows
down on a spring day in a blooming desert. I was
comfortable as hell! It was all still a fuck ed - up  fantasy!
I mark ed oﬀ the best spots to set up my cooling stations. I
noted wher ever the shoulder was wide, and wher e stopping
would have to be avoided. I also took note of gas stationsand other places to ﬁll up on water and buy i ce. Ther e
wer en’t many of them, but they wer e all mapped. A f ter
running the desert gauntlet I’d ear n some r elief fr om the
heat a nd pay  for it with altitude. The ne xt stage o f the race
was an eighteen - mile  climb to T owne P ass at 4,800 feet. The
sun would be setting by t hen and af ter driving that section, I
pulled over, closed my eyes, and visualized it  all.
R esear ch is one part of pr eparation; visualization is another .
F ollowing that T owne P ass climb, I would face a bone -
crushing , nine - mile  des cent. I co uld see it un furl fr om the top
of the pass. One thing I lear ned fr om the Hurt 100 is that
running down hill fucks you up bad, and this time I’d be doing
it o n as phalt. I closed my eyes, opened my mind, and tried to
feel the pain in my quads and calves, knees and shins. I
knew my quads would be ar the brunt of that des cent, so I
made a note to add muscle. My thighs would need to be
plated in  steel.
The eighteen - mile  climb up Darwin P ass fr o m mile seventy -
two  would be pur e hell. I’d have to run - walk  t ha t s ection, but
the su n would be down, I’d welcome the chill in L one P ine,
and fr om ther e I could m ak e up some time because that’s
wher e the r oad ﬂattened out again befor e the ﬁna l thirteen -
mile  c limb up Wh itney P ortal R oad, to the ﬁnish line at 8,374
feet.
Then again, it’s easy to write “mak e up time” in your
notepad, and  another to e x ecute it when you get ther e in
r eal life, but a t least I had notes. T ogether with my annotated
maps, they made up my Badwater ﬁle, which I stu died lik e I
was pr eparing for another ASV AB test. I sat at my kitchen
table, r ead and r e - r ead  t hem,  and visualized ea ch mile the
best I could , but I also  knew that my body still hadn’t
r ecover ed fr om Hawaii, which hamper ed the other, evenmor e import ant aspect of my Badwater pr ep: physical
training.
I was in dir e  need of PT,  but my tendons still hurt so bad I
couldn’t run for months. P ages wer e ﬂying oﬀ the calendar . I
needed to get har der and become the str ongest runner
possible, and  the fact that I couldn’t train lik e I’d hoped
sapped my conﬁdence. Plus, wor d had gotten out at work
about what I was getting  myself into, and while I had some
support fr om  fellow SEALs, I got my shar e of nega tivity too,
especially wh en they found out I still couldn’t run. But that
was no thing new . Who hasn’t dr eamed up a possibility for
themselves o nly to have f riends, colleagues, or fam ily shit all
over it? Most of us ar e motivated as hell to do anything to
pursue our dr eams until those ar ound us r emind us of the
danger, the downside, our own limitations, and all the people
befor e us that didn’t mak e it. Sometimes the advice comes
fr om a well - intentioned  place. They r eally believe they ar e
doing it for o ur own good but if you let them, th ese same
people will talk you out o f your dr eams, and your gover nor
will help them do  it.
That’s one r eason I invented the Cookie Jar . W e must cr eate
a syste m that constantly  r eminds us who the fuck we ar e
when w e ar e at our best, because life is not going to pick us
up wh en we  fall. Ther e w ill be forks in the r oad,  knives in
your fucking  back, mountains to climb, and we ar e only
capable of living up to the image we cr eate for  ourselves.
P r epar e  yourself!
W e kno w life can be har d, and yet we feel sor ry for  ourselves
when it isn’t fair . F r om this point forwar d, a ccept the
following as Goggins’ laws of  natur e:
Y ou will be made fun of .
Y ou will feel insecur e.Y ou may not be the best all the time.
Y ou ma y be the only black, white, Asian, Latino, fe male,
male, g ay, le sbian or [ﬁll in your identity her e] in a given
situation.
Ther e will be times when you feel alone.
Get over  it!
Our minds ar e fucking str ong, they ar e our most powerful
weapon, but we have stopped using them. W e have access
to so many mor e r esour ces today than ever befor e and yet
we ar e so much less capable than those who came befor e
us. If you want to be one of the few to def y those  tr ends in
our ever - sof tening  society, you will have to  be willing to go
to w ar with y ourself and cr eate a whole new identity, which
r equir es an open mind. It’s funny, being open minded is
of ten tagged as new age or sof t. F uck that. Being open
minded enough to ﬁnd a way is old school. It’s what knuckle
draggers do . And that’s e xactly what I  did.
I b or r o wed my friend Stok es’ bik e (he also graduated in Class
235), a nd instead of running to work, I r ode ther e  and back
every day . Ther e was an  elliptical trainer in the brand - new
SEAL T eam F i ve gym, and I hit it once and sometimes twice a
day, with ﬁve layers of clothes on! Death V alley heat scar ed
the sh it out of me, so I simulated it. I suited up in thr ee or
four p airs o f sweatpant s, a few pull - over  sweatshirts, a
hoodie, and a ﬂeece hat, all sealed up in a Gor e - T e x  shell.
A f ter two minutes on the elliptical my heart rate was at 170,
and I stayed at it for two hours at a time. Befor e or  af ter that
I’d hop on th e r owing machine and bang out 30,000 meters
—which is nearly twenty miles. I never did anything for ten
or twen ty mi nutes. My entir e mindset was ultra. It had to be.
A f terwar d I could be see n wringing my clothes out, lik e I’d
just so ak ed t hem in a riv er . Most of the guys thou ght I waswhack ed out, but my old BUD/S instructor, SB G, fucking
loved  it.
That s pring I was task ed as a land warfar e instructor for
SEALs at our base in Niland, Califor nia; a sor ry scrap of
Souther n Califor nia desert, its trailer parks rampant with
unemployed meth heads. Drugged - out  drif ters, who ﬁlter ed
thr ough the disintegrating settlements on the Salton Sea, an
inland body of water sixty miles fr om the Me xico bor der,
wer e our only neighbors . Whenever I passed them on the
str eet while out on a ten - mile  ruck, they’d star e lik e I w as an
alien that had materialized into the r eal world fr om one of
their speed - addled  v ision quests. Then agai n, I was dr essed
in t hr ee layers of clothes and a Gor e - T e x  jac k et in peak
hundr ed - degr ee  heat. I did look lik e some evil messenger
fr om the way - out  beyon d! By then my injuries had become
manageable and I ran ten miles at a time, then hik ed the
hills ar ound Niland for h ours, weighed down wi th a ﬁf ty -
pound  ruck.
The T e am guys I was trai ning consider ed me an alien being
too, an d a few of them we r e mor e frightened of me than the
meth heads. They thought something had happened to me
on the battleﬁeld out in that other desert wher e wa r wasn’t a
game. What they didn’t k now was the battleﬁeld for me was
my own  mind.
I dr ove back out to Death V alley to train and did a ten - mile
run in a sauna suit. That m otherfuck er was hot as balls, but I
had th e har d est race in the world ahead of me, and I’d run a
hundr ed miles twice. I knew how that felt, and the pr ospect
of having to tak e on an a dditional thirty - ﬁve  miles petriﬁed
me. Sur e, I talk ed a go od game, pr ojected all  kinds of
conﬁdence, a nd raised tens of thousands of dollars, but part
of me didn’t know if I had  what it took to ﬁnish the race, so I
had to invent barbaric PT to give myself a  chance.It ta k es a lot of will to pus h yourself when you ar e all alone. I
hated getting  up in the mor ning knowing what the day held
for me . It was very lonely, but I knew that on the  Badwater
course I’d r each a point wher e the pain would become
unbearable and feel insur mountable. Maybe it would be at
mile ﬁf ty or sixty, maybe  later, but ther e would be a time
when I’d want to quit, and I had to be able to slay the one -
second  decisions in or der to stay  in the game and access my
untapped 60  per cent.
During all the lonely hou rs of heat training, I’d started to
dissect the quitting mind  and r ealized that if I was going to
perfor m close to my absolute potential and mak e the W ar rior
F oundation pr oud, I’d have to do mor e than answer the
simple quest ions as they came up. I’d have to stiﬂe the
quitting mind  befor e it gained any traction at all. Befor e I
ever ask ed myself, “ Why? ” I’d need m y Cookie Jar on r ecall
to c onvince me that despite what my body was say ing, I was
immune to  suﬀering.
Because nobody quits an  ultra race or Hell W eek in a split
second. P eople mak e the  decision to quit hours befor e they
ring that bell, so I needed to be pr esent enough to r ecognize
when my body and mind wer e starting to fail in  or der to
short c ir cuit the impulse to look for a way out long befor e I
tumbled into  that fatal fu nnel. Ignoring pain or blocking out
the tru th lik e I did at the San Diego One Day would not work
this time, and if you ar e on the hunt for your 100 per cent you
should catalog your weaknesses and vulnerabilities. Don’t
ignor e them. Be pr epar ed for them, because in any
endurance event, in any high - str ess  envir onment, your
weaknesses will surface li k e bad k ar ma, build in volume, and
overwhelm you. Unless you get ahead of them  ﬁrst.
This is an e x e r cise in r ecognition and visualization.  Y ou must
r ecognize wh at you ar e about to do, highlight what you donot lik e  about it, and spe nd time visualizing each and every
obstacle you can. I was afraid of the heat, so in the  run - up  to
Badwater, I imagined new and mor e medieval self - tortur e
rituals disguised as training sessions (or maybe it was the
other w ay ar ound). I told myself I was immune to suﬀering,
but th at didn’t mean I was immune to pain. I hurt lik e
everybody else, but I was committed to working my way
ar ound and thr ough it so i t would not derail me. By  the time I
toed u p to the line at Badwater at 6 a.m. on July 22 , 2006, I’d
moved my gover nor to 80  per cent. I’d doubled my ceiling in
six months, and you know what that guaranteed  me?
Jack fucking  shit.
Badwater ha s a stagger ed start. R ookies started at 6 a.m.,
veteran runners had an 8 a.m. start, and the true contenders
wouldn’t tak e oﬀ until 10 a.m., which put them in Death
V alley for peak heat. Chris K ostman was one hilarious son of
a bitch. But he didn’t know he’d given one har d
motherfuck er a serious tactical advantage. Not  me. I’m
talking about Ak os  K onya.
Ak os and I met up the night befor e at the F ur nace Cr eek Inn,
wher e all the athletes stayed. He was a ﬁrst - timer  too, and
he look ed a hell of a lot better since the last time we saw one
another . Despite his issue s at the Hurt 100 (he ﬁnished by
the wa y, in 35 hours and 17 minutes), I knew Ak os was a
stud, and since we wer e both in the ﬁrst gr oup I let him pace
me thr ough the desert. Bad  call!
F or the ﬁrst seventeen m iles we wer e side by sid e, and we
look ed lik e an odd couple. Ak os is a 5’7”, 1 22- pound
Hungarian. I was the biggest man in the ﬁeld at 6’1”, 195
pounds, and the only  bla ck guy too . Ak os was sponsor ed and
dr essed in a colorful, bran ded getup. I wor e a tor n gr ey tank
top, black running shorts, and str eamlined Oakley
sunglasses. My feet and ankles wer e wra pped incompr ession tape and stuﬀed into br ok en - in  b ut still springy
running shoe s. I didn’t wear Navy SEAL gear o r W ar rior
F oundation garb. I pr efe r r ed to go incognito . I was the
shadow ﬁgur e ﬁltering into a new world of  pain.
During my ﬁrst Badwater
Although Ak os set a fast pace, the heat didn’t bother me,
partly because it was early and because I’d heat trained so
well. W e wer e the two be st runners in the 6 a.m.  gr oup by
far, and when we passed the F ur nace Cr eek Inn at 8:40 a.m.,
some of the runners fr om  the 10 a.m. gr oup wer e outside,
including Sc ott Jur ek, the defending champion, Badwater
r ecor d - holder , an d an ultra legend. He  must have known we
wer e making  gr eat time, but I’m not sur e he r ea lized that
he’d just glimpsed his stiﬀest  competition.
Not long af ter, Ak os put s ome space between us, and at mile
twenty - six , I started to r ealize that, once again, I went out
way to o fast.  I was dizzy and lightheaded, and I w as dealing
with GI issues. T ranslation: I had to shit on the side of the
r oad. A ll of which stemmed fr om the fact that I was sever ely
dehydrated. My mind spun with dir e pr ognosis af ter dir e
pr ognosis. Ex cuses to quit piled up one af ter another . I didn’t
listen. I r esponded by ta king car e of my dehydration issue
and pounding mor e water than I  wanted.I we nt thr ough the Stovepipe W ells checkpoint at mile forty -
two  a t 1:31 p.m., a full hour af ter Ak os. I’d been on th e race
course for over seven and a half hours and was almost
e x clusively walking by the n. I was pr oud just to have made it
thr ough Deat h V alley on my feet. I took a br eak, went to a
pr oper bathr oom, and changed my clothes. My feet had
swollen mor e than I’d e xpected, and my right big toe had
been c haﬁng the side of the shoe for hours, so stopping felt
lik e sweet r elief . I felt the bloom of a blood blister o n the side
of my lef t foot, but I knew better than to tak e oﬀ my shoes.
Most a thletes size up their shoes to run Badwater, and even
then, they cut out the big toe side panel to cr eate space for
swelling and to minimize chaﬁng. I did not, and I had ninety
mor e miles ahead of  me.
I hik ed the entir e eighteen - mile  clim b to T ow ne P ass at 4, 850
feet. A s pr ed icted, the sun dr opped as I cr ested the pass, the
air cooled, and I pulled on another layer . In the military we
always say we don’t rise to the level of our e xpectations, we
fall to the lev el of our training, and as I hik ed up th e winding
highway with my blister barking, I fell into the same r hythm
I’d ﬁnd  on my long ruc ks in the desert ar ound Niland. I
wasn’t runnin g, but I k ept  a str ong pace and cover ed a lot of
gr ound.
I stuck to my script, ran the entir e nine - mile  des cent, and my
quads paid the price. So did my lef t foot. My b lister was
gr owing by the minute. I could feel it ver ging on hot - air -
balloon  sta tus. If onl y it would burst thr ough my shoe lik e an
old cartoon, and continue  to e xpand until it car rie d me into
the clo uds and dr opped me onto the peak of Mount Whitney
itself .
No such luck. I k ept walki ng, and aside fr om my cr ew, which
included, among others, my wife (K ate was cr ew chief) and
mother, I didn’t see anybody else. I was on an eter nal ruck,mar ching beneath a black dome sk y glittering with starlight.
I’d b een walking for so long I e xpected a swar m of runners to
materialize a t any moment, then leave me in their wak e. But
nobody show ed. The only evidence of life on planet pain was
the r hy thm of my own h ot br eath, the bur n of my cartoon
blister, and the high beams and r ed taillights of r oad trippers
blazing trails  thr ough the Califor nia night. That is, until the
sun was r eady to rise and a swar m ﬁnally did ar rive at mile
110.
I w as e xhausted and dehydrated by then, glazed in sweat,
dirt, an d salt,  when horseﬂies began to dive bomb me one at
a ti me. T wo b ecame four which became ten and ﬁf teen. They
beat their wings against m y skin, bit my thighs, an d crawled
into m y ears . This shit wa s biblical, and it was my  very last
test. My cr ew took tur ns swatting ﬂies oﬀ my skin with a
towel. I was in personal best ter ritory alr eady . I’d cover ed
mor e t han 110 miles on foot, and with “ only” twenty - ﬁve
miles t o go ther e was no fucking way these devil ﬂies would
stop me. W ould they? I k ept mar ching, and my cr ew k ept
swatting ﬂies, for the ne xt eight  miles!
Since watchin g Ak os run away fr om me af ter mile seventeen,
I ha dn’t seen another Badwater runner until mile 122 when
K ate pulled up alongside  me.
“Scott Jur ek is two miles behind you,” she  said.
W e wer e mor e than twenty - six  ho urs into th e race, and Ak os
had alr eady ﬁnished, but  the fact that Jur ek was  just now
catching me meant my time must have been pr etty damn
good. I  hadn’ t run much, but all those Niland rucks made my
hiking stride swif t and str ong. I was able to power hik e
ﬁf teen - minute  miles,  and got my nutrition on the move to
save time. A f ter it was all over, when I e xamined  the splits
and ﬁn ishing times of all the competitors, I r ealized mybiggest fear, the heat, had actually helped me. It was the
gr eat equalizer . It made fast runners  slow .
W ith Jur ek on the hunt, I was inspir ed to give it everything I
had as I tur n ed onto Whitney P ortal R oad and started the
ﬁnal thirteen - mile  clim b. I ﬂash ed onto my pr e - race  strategy
to w alk the slopes and r un the ﬂats as the r oad  switched
back lik e a snak e slithe ring into the clouds. Jur ek wasn’t
pursuing me,  but he was on the chase. Ak os had ﬁnished in
twenty - ﬁve  hours and ﬁf ty - eight  minutes and Jur ek hadn’t
been a t his best that day . The clock was winding down on his
eﬀort to r epeat as Badwater champion, but he had the
tactical advantage of knowing Ak os’ time in advanc e. He also
knew his splits. Ak os hadn ’t had that luxury, and somewher e
on the highway he’d stopped for a thirty - minute  nap.
Jur ek wasn’t alone. He ha d a pacer, a for midable runner in
his own right named Dus ty Olson who nipped at his heels.
W or d was Olson ran at least seventy miles of the race
himself . I hear d them appr oach fr om behind, and whenever
the r oad switched back I could see them below me. F inally,
at m ile 128, on the steepest part of the steepest r oad in this
entir e fuck ed - up  race, they wer e right behind me. I stopped
running, got out of the way, and cheer ed them  on.
Jur ek was the fastest ultra runner in history at that  point, but
his pa ce wasn’t electric  that late in the game. It was
consistent. He chopped down the mighty mountain with each
deliberate step. He wor e black running shorts, a blue
sleeveless shirt, and a white baseball cap. Behind him, Olson
had hi s long, shoulder length hair cor ralled with a bandana,
otherwise their unifor m was identical. Jur ek was the mule
and Olson was riding  him.
“ Come on, Jurk er! Come o n, Jurk er! This is your ra ce,” Olson
said as  they passed me up. “No one is better than you! No
one!” O lson k ept talking as they ran ahead, r eminding Jur ekthat he had mor e to give.  Jur ek obliged and k ept ch ar ging up
the mountain. He lef t it all out on that unfor giving asphalt. It
was amazing to  watch.
Jur ek wound up winning the 2006 edition of Badwater when
he ﬁn ished in twenty - ﬁve  h ours  and forty - one  minutes,
seventeen m inutes faster than Ak os, who must have
r egr etted his power nap, but that wasn’t my concer n. I had a
race of my own to  ﬁnish.
Whitney P ortal R oad winds up a par ched, e xposed r ock
escarpment for ten miles, befor e ﬁnding shade in gathering
stands of cedar and pine.  Ener gized by Jur ek and his cr ew, I
ran mo st of the last seven miles. I used my hips to  push my
legs forwar d and every single step was agony, but af ter
thirty hours, eighteen m inutes, and ﬁf ty - four  seconds of
running, hiking, sweating, and suﬀering, I snapped the tape
to the cheers of a smal l cr owd. I’d wanted to quit thirty
times. I had to mentally inch my way thr ough 135 miles, but
ninety runners competed that day, and I came in ﬁf th  place.Ak os and I af ter my second Badwater in 2007—I placed thir d and Ak os came in
second again
I p lodd ed ov er to a grass y slope in the woods and  lay back
on a bed of pine needles as K ate unlaced my shoes. That
blister had fully colonized my lef t foot. It was so big  it look ed
lik e a sixth toe, the color and te xtur e of cher ry bubble gum. I
marveled at it while she r emoved the compr ession tape fr om
my feet. Then I stagger ed  to the stage to accept my medal
fr om K ostma n. I’d just ﬁnished one of the har dest races on
planet earth. I’d visualize d that moment ten times at least
and thought I’d be elated, but I wasn’t.Blister ed toe af ter Badwater
SB G’s email to K ostman. He was right: I did ﬁnish in the top 10 per cent!
He handed me my medal, shook my hand, and interviewed
me for the cr owd, but I wa s only half ther e. While he spok e, I
ﬂashed to the ﬁnal climb and a pass above 8,000 feet, wher e
the view was unr eal. I could see all the way to Death V alley .
Near th e end  of another h or rible jour ney, I got to se e wher e I
came f r om. It was the pe rfect metaphor for my twisted life.
Once again I was br ok en, destr oyed twenty diﬀer ent ways,
but I’d passed another evolution, another crucible, and my
r ewar d was a lot mor e than a medal and a few min utes with
K ostman’s  micr ophone.
It was a whole new  bar .
I close d my eyes and sa w Jur ek and Olson, Ak os and K arl
Meltzer . All of them had something I didn’t. They u nderstood
how to  drain every last dr op and put themselves in  a position
to win the w orld’s most diﬃcult races, and it was time to
seek out that feeling for m yself . I’d pr epar ed lik e a madman.
I kn ew myself and the ter rain. I stayed ahead of the quitting
mind, answer ed the simple questions, and stayed in the
race, but ther e was m or e to be done. Ther e was still
somewher e h igher for me to rise. A cool br eeze r ustled the
tr ees, dried the sweat fr om my skin, and soothed my aching
bones. It whisper ed in my ear and shar ed a secr et which
echoed in my brain lik e a drumbeat that wouldn’t  stop.
There is no ﬁnish line, Goggins. There is no ﬁnish  line.C H A L L E N G E  # 7
The main objective her e is to slowly start to r emove the
gover nor fr om your  brain.
F irst, a quick r eminder of  how this pr ocess works. In 1999,
when I weighed 297 pounds, my ﬁrst run was a quarter
mile. F ast forwar d to 2007, I ran 205 miles in thirty - nine
hours, nonst op. I didn’t get ther e over night, and I don’t
e xpect you to either . Y ou r job is to push past your nor mal
stopping  point.
Whether you ar e running on a tr eadmill or doing a set of
push - ups , ge t to  the point wher e you ar e so tir ed and in pain
that your mind is begging you to stop. Then push just 5 to
10 per cent fu rther . If the m ost push - ups  you have ever done
is one hundr ed in a work out, do 105 or 110. If you nor mally
run thirty miles each week, run 10 per cent mor e ne xt  week.
This gradual ramp - up  will help pr e vent injury and allow your
body and mind to slowly a dapt to your new workload. It also
r esets your baseline, which is important because you’r e
about to incr ease your workload another 5 to 10 per cent the
following week, and the week af ter  that.
Ther e is so much pain a nd suﬀering involved in physical
challenges th at it’s the b est training to tak e command of
your inner dialogue, and the newfound mental str ength and
conﬁdence you gain by continuing to push yourself
physically wi ll car ry over to other aspects in your life. Y ou
will r ealize that if you wer e underperfor ming in your physical
challenges, ther e is a good chance you ar e underperfor ming
at school and work  too .The bottom line is that life is one big mind game. The only
person you ar e playing against is yourself . Stick with this
pr ocess and soon what you thought was impossible will be
something yo u do every fucking day of your life. I want to
hear your stories. P ost on social. Hashtags: #ca nthurtme
#The40P er centR ule #dontgetcomfortable.C H A P T E R  E I G H T
8 .  T ALENT NOT REQUIRED
T HE  NIG HT  BEFORE  THE  FIRST  L O NG - DIST ANCE  TRIA THL ON  IN  MY  LIFE , I STOOD
with m y mot her on the d eck of a sprawling, seven-million-
dollar beach house in K ona watching the moonlight play on
the wa ter . Most people know K ona, a gor geous town on the
west coast of the island o f Hawaii, and triathlons in general,
thanks to the Ir onman W o rld Championships. Although ther e
ar e far mor e Olympic distance and shorter sprint triathlons
held ar ound the world than ther e ar e Ir onman events, it was
the original Ir onman in K ona that placed the sport on the
inter national radar . It starts with a 2.4-mile swim followed by
a 112- mile bik e ride, and closes with a marathon r un. A dd to
that stiﬀ and shif ting winds and blistering heat cor ridors
r eﬂected by harsh lava ﬁelds, and the race r educes most
competitors to open blis ters of raw anguish, but I wasn’t
her e fo r that.  I came to K ona to compete in a less c elebrated
for m o f even mor e intense masochism. I was  ther e to
compete for the title of  Ultraman.
Over the ne xt thr ee days  I would swim 6.2 miles , ride 261
miles, and run a double marathon, covering the entir e
perimeter of the Big Island of Hawaii. Once again, I was
raising money for the Special Operations W ar rior F o undation,
and be cause I’d been written up and interviewed on camera
af ter Badwat er, I was inv ited by a multi - millionair e  I’d never
met to  stay in his absur d palace on the sand in the  run - up  to
the Ultraman W orld Championships in November  2006.It was a gener ous gestur e , but I was so focused on becoming
the ver y best  version of m yself his glitz didn’t impr ess me. In
my mi nd, I still hadn’t ac hieved shit. If anything, staying in
his hou se only inﬂated the chip on my shoulder . He would
never have invited my wanna - be - thug  a ss to come  chill with
him in K ona luxury back  in the day . He only r eached out
because I’d become some body a rich guy lik e him wanted to
know . Still, I appr eciated  being able to show my mom a
better life, and whenever  I was oﬀer ed a taste, I invited her
to e xperienc e it with me. She’d swallowed mor e pain than
anyone I’d ever known, an d I wanted to r emind her that we’d
climbed out of that gutte r, while I k ept my own gaze lock ed
at s ewer level. W e didn’ t live in that $7 a month place in
Brazil anymor e, but I was still paying r ent on that
motherfuck er, and will be for the r est of my  life.
The ra ce launched fr om the beach beside th e pier in
downtown K ona—the same start line as the Ir onman W orld
Championships, but ther e wasn’t much of a cr ow d for our
race. Ther e wer e only thirty athletes in the e ntir e ﬁeld
compar ed to  over 1,200 i n the Ir onman! It was such a small
gr oup I could look every one of my competitors i n the eye
and siz e them  up, which i s how I noticed the har de st man on
the be ach. I never did catch his name, but I’ll always
r emember hi m because he was in a wheelchair . T alk about
heart. That man had a pr esence beyond his  statur e.
He was fucking  immense!
Ever s ince I’d started up in BUD/S, I’d been in sear ch of
people lik e that. Men and women with an uncommon way of
thinking. One thing that surprised me about military special
operations was that some  of the guys lived so mainstr eam.
They wer en’t  trying to push themselves every day of their
lives, a nd I wanted to be  ar ound people who thought and
trained uncommon 24/7, not just when duty called.  That manhad every e x cuse in the world to be at home, but he was
r eady to do one of the har dest stage races in t he world,
something 99.9 per cent of the public wouldn’t even consider,
and wi th just  his two ar m s! T o me, he was what ultra racing
was all about, and its why  af ter Badwater I’d become hook ed
on this world. T alent wasn’t r equir ed for this sport. It was all
about heart and har d work, and it deliver ed r elentless
challenge af ter r elentless challenge, always demanding
mor e.
But tha t does n’t mean I w as well - pr epar ed  f or  this race . I still
didn’t own a bik e. I bor r owed one thr ee weeks earlier fr om
another frien d. It was a  Griﬃn, an uber - high - end  bicycle
custom made  for my friend who was even bigger than I was.
I bor r owed his clip - in  shoes too, which wer e just shy of
clown - sized . I ﬁlled the empty space with thick socks and
compr ession tape, and didn’t tak e the time to lear n bik e
mechanics b efor e leavin g for K ona. Changing tir es, ﬁxing
chains and spok es, all th e stuﬀ I know how to do now, I
hadn’t lear ne d yet. I just bor r owed the bik e and lo gged over
1,000 m iles in the thr ee weeks prior to Ultraman. I’ d wak e up
at 4  a. m. and  get one hundr ed - mile  rid es in befo r e work. On
week ends I’d  ride 125 miles, get oﬀ the bik e a nd run a
marathon, but I only did six training swims, just two in the
open w ater, and in the ult ra octagon all your weaknesses ar e
r evealed.
The ten - kilometer  swim should have tak en me about two and
a half hours to complete , but it took me over thr ee, and it
hurt. I was dr essed in a sleeveless wetsuit for buoyancy, but
it w as too tight under my ar ms, and within thirty m inutes my
ar mpits began to chafe. An hour later the salty ed ge of my
suit ha d bec ome sandpap er that ripped my skin w ith every
str ok e. I switched fr om fr eestyle to side str ok e and back
again, desperate for c omfort that never cam e. Everyr evolution of  my ar ms cut my skin raw and bloody on both
sides.
Coming out of the water at Ultraman
Plus, t he sea was choppy as hell. I drank sea water, my
stomach ﬂipped and ﬂop ped lik e a ﬁsh suﬀocating in fr esh
air, an d I puk ed a half do zen times at least. Because of the
pain, my poor mechanics , and the str ong cur r ent, I swam a
meandering line that str etched to seven and a half miles. All
of t hat in or d er to clear w hat was supposed to be a 6.2- mile
swim. My legs wer e jelly when I stagger ed to shor e, and my
vision r ock ed  lik e a teeter totter during an earthquak e. I had
to lie down,  then crawl behind the bathr ooms , wher e I
vomited aga in. Other swimmers gather ed in the transition
ar ea, h opped into their saddles, and pedaled oﬀ into the lava
ﬁelds in a blink. W e still had a ninety - mile  bik e ride to knock
oﬀ bef or e the day was d one, and they wer e getting af ter it
while I was s till on my knees. Right on time, tho se simple
questions bubbled to the  surface.
Why the fuck am I even out  here?
I’m not a  triathlete!
I’m cha fed to hell, sick as fuck, and the ﬁrst part o f the ride
is all  uphill!Why do you keep doing this to yourself , Goggins?
I sounded lik e a whiny bitch, but I knew ﬁnding some comfort
would help me hem my vagina, so I paid no attention to the
other athlete s who eased thr ough their transition. I had to
focus o n getting my legs under me and slowing my spun - out
mind. F irst I got some food down, a little at a time. Then I
tr eated the cuts under my ar ms. Most triathletes don’t
change their clothes. I did. I slipped on some comfortable
bik e shorts and a lycra sh irt, and ﬁf teen minutes later I was
upright, in the saddle, and climbing into the lava ﬁelds. F or
the ﬁrst twenty minutes I was still nauseous. I pedaled and
puk ed, r eplenished my ﬂuids, and puk ed again. Thr ough it
all, I gave myself one job : stay in the ﬁght! Stay in it long
enough to ﬁnd a  foothold.
T en miles later, as the r oad r ose onto the shoulders of a giant
volcano and the incline incr eased, I shook oﬀ my sea legs
and found momentum. Riders appear ed ahead lik e bogeys
on a radar, a nd I pick ed them oﬀ, one by one. V ict ory was a
cur e - all . Each time I passed another motherfuck er I got less
and less sick. I was in fourteenth place when I saddled up,
but by  the time I appr oac hed the end of that ninety - mile  leg
ther e was only one man in fr ont of me. Gary W ang, the
favorite in the  race.
As I hammer ed towar d the ﬁnish line I could see a r eporter
and p hotographer fr om T riathlete  magazine interviewing
him. N one of them e xpected to see my black ass, and they
all watched me car efully . During the four months since
Badwater, I’d of ten dr eamt of being in position to win an
ultra race, and as I coast ed past Gary and those r eporters, I
knew the moment had ar rived, and my e xpectations wer e
inter galactic.
The fo llowing mor ning, w e lined up for the second stage, a
171- mile  bik e ride thr ough the mountains and back towar dthe west coast. Gary W ang had a buddy in the race, Jeﬀ
Landauer, ak a the Land Shark, and those two r ode together .
Gary h ad don e the race b efor e and knew the ter rain. I didn’t,
and by mile one hundr ed, I was r oughly six minut es oﬀ the
lead.
As usual, my mother and K ate wer e my two - headed  support
cr ew . They handed me r eplacement water bottles, pack ets of
GU, and pr otein drinks f r om the side of the r oad, which I
consumed in motion to k eep my glycogen and electr olyte
levels up. I’d become much mor e scientiﬁc about my
nutrition since that Myople x and Ritz crack er meltdown in
San Diego, and with the  biggest climb of the da y looming
into v iew I needed to be r eady to r oar . On a bicycle,
mountains pr oduce pain, and pain was my busine ss. As the
r oad peak ed in pitch, I put my head down and hammer ed as
har d as I co uld. My lungs heaved until they wer e ﬂipped
inside out and back aga in. My heart was a poun ding bass
line. W hen I cr ested the pass, my mom pulled up alongside
me and holler ed, “ David, you ar e two minutes oﬀ the  lead!”
R oger  that!
I curled into an aer odyn amic cr ouch and shot downhill at
over 40 mph. My bor r ow ed Griﬃn was equipped with aer o
bars and I l eaned over them, focusing only on the white
dotted line and my perfec t for m. When the r oad leveled oﬀ I
went a ll out and k ept my  pace up ar ound 27 mp h. I had a
Land Shark and his budd y on an industrial - sized  hook, and
was r eeling them all the way  in.
Until my fr ont tir e  blew .
Befor e I had time to r eact, I was oﬀ the bik e, somersaulting
over th e handlebars into space. I could see it happening in
slow motion,  but time spe d back up when I crash landed on
my right side and my sh oulder crumpled with blunt for ce.The si de of my face sk idded the asphalt until I stopped
moving, and I r olled onto my back in shock. My mother
slammed on her brak es, leapt fr om the car, and rushed over .
I wa s bleeding in ﬁve plac es, but nothing felt br ok en. Ex cept
my hel met, which was crack ed in two, my sunglasses, which
wer e shatter ed, and my  bicycle.
I’d run over a bolt that pier ced the tir e, tube, and rim. I didn’t
pay at tention to my r oad rash, the pain in my shoulder, or
the blood dribbling down my elbow and cheek. All  I thought
about was that bicycle. O nce again, I was underpr epar ed! I
had no  spar e  parts and di dn’t have any clue how to  change a
tube or a tir e. I had r ented a back - up  bicycle which was in
my mo m’s r e ntal car, but it was a heavy, slow piece of shit
compar ed to that Griﬃn. It didn’t even have clip in pedals, so
I ca lled for th e oﬃcial race mechanics to assess the Griﬃn.
As w e waited, seconds piled up into twenty pr ecious minutes
and when mechanics ar riv ed, they didn’t have supplies to ﬁx
my fr ont wheel either, so I hopped on my clunk y back - up  and
k ept  r olling.
I tried not to think of ba d luck and missed opportunities. I
needed to ﬁnish str ong and get myself within striking
distance by the end of t he day, because day thr ee would
bring a double marathon, and I was convinced that  I was the
best runner in the ﬁeld. Sixteen miles fr om the ﬁnish line, the
bik e mechanic track ed me down. He’d r epair ed my Griﬃn! I
switched out my har dwar e for the second time and made up
eight minute s on the leaders, ﬁnishing the day in th ir d place,
twenty - two  minutes oﬀ the  lead.
I cr af ted a s imple strategy for day thr ee. Go out  har d and
build u p a fat cushion over Gary and the Land Shark so that
when I hit th e inevitable wall, I’d have enough distance to
maintain the overall lead  all the way to the ﬁnish line. In
other wor ds, I didn’t have any strategy at  all.I b egan  my run at Boston Marathon qualif ying pace . I pushed
har d because  I wanted my competitors to hear my splits and
forfeit their souls as I built that big lead I’d ant icipated. I
knew I would blow up s omewher e. That’s ultra life. I just
hoped it would happen lat e enough in the race that Gary and
the La nd Shark would be content to race one another for
second and give up all hope of winning the overall  title.
Didn’t happen quite lik e  that.
A t mile thirty - ﬁve  I was alr eady in agony and walking mor e
than I was r unning. By mile forty, I watched both enemy
vehicles pull up so their cr ew chiefs could peep m y for m. I
was sh owing a ton of we akness, which gave Gary and the
Land Shark ammunition. The miles mounted too slowly . I
hemor r haged time. L uckily, by mile forty - ﬁve , Gary had
blown up too, but the Land Shark was r ock solid, still on my
ass, and I did n’t have anything lef t to ﬁght him oﬀ . Instead,
as I suﬀer ed and stagger ed towar d downtown K ona, my lead
evaporated.
In the end, the Land Shark taught me a vital lesson. F r om
day one, he had run his own race. My early burst on day
thr ee didn’t faze him. He  welcomed it as the ill - conceived
strategy that  it was, focused on his own pace, w aited me
out, and took my  soul. I was the ﬁrst ath lete to cr oss the
ﬁnish line of the Ultraman that year, but as far as the clock
was co ncer ned I was no champion. While I came in ﬁrst place
on the  run, I lost the ove rall race by ten minutes and took
second place. The Land Shark was cr owned  Ultraman!
I watched him celebrate knowing e xactly how I’d wasted an
opportunity to win. I’d lost my vantage point. I’d never
evaluated the race strategically and didn’t have any
backstops in place. Backstops ar e a versatile tool that I
employ in all facets of my life. I was lead navigator when I
operated in Iraq with the SEAL T eams, and “backstop” is anavigation te r m. It’s the mark I made on my map. An alert
that we’d missed a tur n or veer ed oﬀ  course.
L et’s s ay you’r e navigating thr ough the woods and  you have
to go one click towar d a ridgeline, then mak e a tur n. In the
military, we would do a m ap study ahead of time and mark
that tur n on our maps, an d another point about 200 meters
past th at tur n, and a thir d an additional 150 meter s past the
second mark. Those last two marks ar e your backstops.
T ypically, I used ter rain featur es, lik e r oads, cr eeks, a giant
cliﬀ in the c ountryside, o r landmark buildings in an urban
setting, so that when we hit them I knew we’d  gone oﬀ
course. That’s what back stops ar e for, to tell you to tur n
ar ound, r eassess, and tak e an alter native r oute to
accomplish the same mis sion. I never lef t our base in Iraq
without havin g thr ee e xit strategies. A primary r oute and two
others, pinne d to backstops, we could fall back to i f our main
r oute became  compr omised.
On day  thr ee of Ultraman, I tried to win with sheer will. I was
all m otor, no intellect. I didn’t evaluate my condition, r espect
my opponen ts’ heart, or manage the clock well enough. I
had no primary strategy, let alone alter native avenues to
victory, and  ther efor e I had no idea wher e to employ
backstops. In r etr ospect I should have paid mor e attention to
my ow n clock, and my backstops should have been placed
on my  split times. When I saw how fast I was run ning that
ﬁrst marathon, I should have been alar med and eased oﬀ the
gas. A slowe r ﬁrst marathon may have lef t me with enough
ener gy to dr op the hammer once we wer e back in the lava
ﬁelds on the Ir onman course, heading towar d the ﬁnish line.
That’s when you tak e som eone’s soul—at the end of a race,
not at the beginning. I’d raced har d, but if I’d run smarter
and handled  the bik e situation better, I would have given
myself a better chance to  win.Still, coming in second pl ace at Ultraman was no disaster . I
raised good money for families in need and book ed mor e
positive ink for the SE ALs in T riathlete  and Competitor
magazines.  Navy brass took notice.  One mor ning, I was
called into a meeting with A dmiral Ed W inters, a two - star
A dmiral and the top man at Naval Special W arfar e
Command. When you’r e a n enlisted guy and hear an A dmiral
wants a wor d, your ass sort of puck ers up. He wasn’t
supposed to seek me out . Ther e was a chain of command in
place speciﬁcally to pr event conversations between R ear
A dmirals and  enlisted men lik e me. W ithout any wa r ning that
was al l out the window, and I had a feeling it wa s my own
fault.
Thanks to the positive media I’d generated, I had r eceived
or ders to join the r ecruit ment division in 2007, and by the
time I was or der ed into the A dmiral’s oﬃce I’d done  plenty of
public speaking on beha lf of the Navy SEALs. But I was
diﬀer ent than  most of the other r ecruiters. I didn’t just par r ot
the Navy’s script. I always included my own life sto ry, oﬀ the
cuﬀ. As I wait ed outside the A dmiral’s oﬃce I close d my eyes
and ﬂipped thr ough memory ﬁles, sear ching for when and
how I’d overstepped and embar rassed the SEALs. I was the
pictur e of tension, sitting stiﬀ and alert, sweating thr ough my
unifor m when he opened the door to his  oﬃce.
“ Goggins,” h e said, “good to see you, come on in.” I opened
my eyes, followed him ins ide, and stood straight as an ar r ow,
lock ed at attention. “Sit down,” he said with a smile,
gesturing to a chair facing his desk. I sat, but maintained my
postur e and avoided all eye contact. A dmiral W inters sized
me  up.
He was in his late ﬁf ties, and though he appear ed r elax ed, he
maintained perfect postur e. T o become an A dmiral is to rise
thr ough the ranks of ten s of thousands. He’d been a SEALsince 1981, was an Operations Oﬃcer at DEVGRU (Naval
Special W arfar e Development Gr oup), and a Commander in
A fghanistan and Iraq. A t each stop he stood taller than the
r est, and was among the str ongest, smartest, shr ewdest, and
most charismatic men the  Navy had ever seen. He  also ﬁt a
certain standar d. A dmiral W inters was the ultima te insider,
and I was as outside the bo x as you could get in t he United
States  Navy .
“ Hey, r elax,” he said, “ you ar en’t in any tr ouble. Y ou’r e doing
a gr eat job in r ecruiting.” He gestur ed to a ﬁle on his
otherwise immaculate desk. It was ﬁlled with so me of my
clips. “Y ou’r e r epr esenting us r eally well. But ther e’s some
men out ther e we need to  do a better job of r eaching out to,
and I’m hoping you can  help.”
That’s when it ﬁnally hit me. A two - star  A dmiral needed my
help.
The tr ouble we faced as an or ganization, he said , was that
we wer e ter rible at r ecruiting A frican Americans into the
SEAL T eams. I knew that alr eady . Black people made up only
1 per c ent of all special for ces, even though we ar e 13
per cent of the general population. I was just the thirty - sixth
A frican Amer ican ever to graduate BUD/S, and one of the
r easons for that was we wer en’t hitting the best  places to
r ecruit black men into the SEAL teams, and we didn’t have
the rig ht r ecruiters either . The military lik es to think of itself
as a  pur e meritocracy (it isn’t), which is why for decades this
issue was ignor ed. I called A dmiral W inters r ecently, and he
had th is to say about the pr oblem, which was originally
ﬂagged by the P entagon during the seco nd Bush
administration and sent to the A dmiral’s desk to  ﬁx.
“W e w er e missing an opportunity to get gr eat athletes into
the teams and mak e the teams better,” he said, “and we hadplaces we needed to send people wher e, if they look ed lik e
me, they would be  compr omised.”
In Iraq, A dmiral W inters made his name building elite counter
ter r orism for ces. That’s one of the primary missions in
special for ces: to train allied military units so they can
contr ol social cancers lik e ter r orism and drug traﬃcking and
maintain stability within bor ders. By 2007, Al Qaeda had
made inr oads into A frica, allied with e xisting e xtr emist
networks including Bok o Haram and al Shabaab, and ther e
was talk of building up counterter r orism for ces in Somalia,
Chad, Nigeria, Mali, Camer oon, Burkina F aso, and Niger . Our
operations in Niger made inter national news in 2018 when
four American special operations soldiers wer e killed in an
ambush, drawing public scrutiny to the mission. B ut back in
2007, almost nobody knew we wer e about to get involved in
W est A frica, or that we la ck ed the personnel to get it done.
As I sat in his oﬃce, wha t I hear d was the time had ﬁnally
come when we needed bl ack people in special for ces and our
military leaders wer e clue less as to how to meet that need
and entice mor e of us into the  fold.
It was  all new infor mation to me. I didn’t know anything
about the A frican thr eat . The only hostile ter rain I knew
about was in A fghanistan and Iraq. That is, until A dmiral
W inters dr opped a whole new detail on me,  and the
military’s pr oblem oﬃcially became my pr oblem. I’d r eport to
my Captain and the A d miral, he said, and hit the r oad,
visiting ten to twelve citie s at a time, with a goal of spiking
r ecruiting numbers in the POC (people of color) category .
W e made the ﬁrst stop on this new mission together . It was
at Howar d University, in W ashington D.C., pr obably the best
known histor ically black university in America. W e’d dr opped
in t o speak to the footba ll team, and though I kne w almost
nothing abou t historically  black colleges and universities, Iknew s tudents who attended them ar en’t usually t he type to
think of the military as an optimal car eer choice. Thanks to
our country’s history and the rampant racism that continues
to t his day, black politic al thought tr ends lef t of center at
these institutions, and if you’r e r ecruiting for the Navy
SEALs, ther e ar e deﬁnitely better choices than the Howar d
University practice ﬁeld to ﬁnd a willing ear . But this new
focus r equir ed work in hostile ter ritory, not mass enthusiasm.
W e wer e looking for one or two gr eat men at each  stop.
The A d miral and I walk ed onto the ﬁeld, dr essed in unifor m,
and I noted  suspicion and disr egar d in the eyes of our
audience. A dmiral W inters had planned to intr oduce me, but
our icy r eception told me we had to go another  way .
“Y ou wer e shy at ﬁrst,” A dmiral W inters r emember ed, “but
when it was time to speak, you look ed at me and said, ‘I got
this, sir .’”
I launc hed rig ht into my l ife story . I told those athletes what
I’ve alr eady told you, and  said we wer e looking for guys with
heart. Men who knew it was going to be har d tomor r ow and
the da y af ter that and welcomed every challenge.  Men who
wanted to become better athletes, and smarter and mor e
capable in all aspects of their life. W e wanted guys who
craved honor and purpose and wer e open minded enough to
face their deepest  fears.
“ By the time you wer e done you could have hear d a pin
dr op,” A dmiral W inters  r ecalled.
F r om then on, I was given  command of my own schedule and
budget and leeway to operate, as long as I hit certain
r ecruitment thr esholds. I had to come up with my own
material and  knew that m ost people didn’t think they could
ever b ecome a Navy SEAL, so I br oadened the message. I
wanted everyone who he ar d me out to know that even ifthey didn’t walk in our dir ection they could still become mor e
than th ey ev er dr eamed. I made sur e to cover my  life in its
entir ety so if anyone had any e x cuse, my story wou ld void all
that out. My main drive was to deliver hope tha t with or
without the military anybody could change their life, so long
as the y k ept an open m ind, abandoned the path of least
r esistance, and sought out the diﬃcult and most challenging
tasks they could ﬁnd. I was mining for diamonds in  the r ough
lik e  me.
F r om 2007–2009, I was on the r oad for 250 days a year and
spok e to 500,000 people at high schools and universities. I
spok e at inner city high schools in tough neighbor hoods, at
dozens of historically black colleges and universities, and at
schools with all cultur es, shapes, and shades well
r epr esented. I’d come a long way fr om fourth grade, when I
couldn’t stan d up in fr on t of a class of twenty kids and say
my own name without  stuttering.
T eenagers ar e walking, talking bullshit detectors, but the kids
who hear d me speak bought into my message because
everywher e I stopped, I also ran an ultra race and  r olled my
training runs and races into my overall r ecruitment strategy .
I’d usu ally la nd in their t own midweek, mak e my speeches,
then ru n a race on Satur day and Sunday . In one str etch in
2007, I ran an ultra almos t every week end. Ther e wer e ﬁf ty -
mile  races, 100- kilometer  races, 100- mile  r aces,  and longer
ones too . I was all about spr eading the Navy SEAL legend
that I loved, and wanted to be true and living our  ethos.
Essentially, I had two full - time  jobs. My schedule was
jammed full,  and while I know that having the ﬂe xibility to
manage my own time contributed to my ability to train for
and co mpete on the ultra cir cuit, I still put in ﬁf ty hours a
week a t work, clocking in every day fr om about 7:3 0 a.m. to5:30 p .m. My training hours came in addition to, not instead
of, my work  commitments.
I ap pear ed at upwar ds of forty - ﬁve  schools every month, and
af ter e ach appearance I had to ﬁle an A f ter A ction R eport
(A AR), detailing how many separate events (an a uditorium
speech, a work out, etc.) I or ganized, how many kids I spok e
to, and  how many of those wer e actually inter ested. These
A ARs went dir ectly to my Captain and the  A dmiral.
I lear ne d quic kly that I wa s my own best pr op. Sometimes I’d
dr ess in a SEAL t - shirt  wit h a T riden t on it, run ﬁf ty miles to a
speaking eng agement, an d show up soaking wet. Or I would
do push - ups  for the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of my speech, or r oll a
pull - up  ba r out on stage and do pull - ups  while I was talking.
That’s right, the shit you see me do on social m edia isn’t
new . I’ve been living this life for eleven  years!
Wher ever I stopped, I invi ted the kids who wer e int er ested to
come t rain w ith me befor e or af ter school, or cr ew  on one of
my ultra races. W or d got out and soon the media—local
television, print, and radio—showed up, especially if I was
running betw een cities to get to the ne xt gig. I had to be
articulate, well gr oomed, and do well in the races I  enter ed.
I r eme mber landing in Colorado the week of the legendary
L eadville 100  trail race. The school year had just st arted, and
on my ﬁrst night in Denver I mapped out the ﬁve s chools on
my r oster in r elation to the trails I wanted to hik e and run. A t
each s top I’d  invite the ki ds to train with me, but war n them
that my day started ea rly . A t 3 a.m. I would drive to a
trailhead, meet up with all the students who dar ed to show,
and by 4 a.m . we’d begin power hiking up one of C olorado’s
ﬁf ty - eight  s umm its a bove 14,000 - feet . Then  we’d sprint
down the mountain to str engthen our quads. A t 9 a.m. I hit
another scho ol, and then another . A f ter the bell rang, I
work ed out with the foo tball, track, or swim teams at theschools I visited, then ra n back into the mountains to train
until sunset . All of that to r ecruit stud athletes and
acclimatize for the highest altitude ultra marathon in the
world.
The ra ce star ted at 4 a.m . on a Satur day, departing fr om the
city of L eadville, a working - class  s ki town wit h fr ontier r oots,
and traversing a network of beautiful and harsh R ock y
Mountain tra ils that range fr om 9,200 feet to 12,600 feet in
elevation. Wh en I ﬁnished at 2 a.m. on Sunday, a  teenager
fr om Denver who attended a school I’d visited a few days
earlier was waiting for m e at the ﬁnish line. I didn’t have a
gr eat race (I came in 14t h place, rather than my typical top
ﬁve), but I a lways made sur e to ﬁnish str ong, and when I
sprinted home he appr oached me with a wide smile and
said, “I dr ove two hours just to see you  ﬁnish!”
The lesson: you never know who you’r e aﬀecting. My poor
race r esults meant less than nothing to that yo ung man
because I’d helped ope n his eyes to a new world of
possibility and capability that he sensed within himself . He’d
followed me fr om his high school auditorium to L eadville
because he was looking for absolute pr oof—my ﬁnishing the
race—that it was  p ossi ble to  transcend the typical and
become mor e, and as I cooled down and toweled oﬀ he
ask ed me for tips so he could one day run all day  and night
thr ough the mountains in his  back yar d.
I h ave several stories lik e  that. Mor e than a dozen kids came
out to pace and cr ew for  me at the McNaughton P ark T rail
R ace, a 150- miler  h eld outside of P eoria, Illinois. T wo dozen
students trained with me in Minot, North Dak ota. T ogether
we ran  the fr ozen tundra befor e sunrise in January when it
was twenty below zer o!  Once I spok e at a school in a
majority black neighbor hood in A tlanta, and as I wa s leaving,
a mot her showed up with her two sons who had longdr eamed of becoming N avy SEALs but k ept it a secr et
because enlisting in the military wasn’t consider ed cool in
their neighbor hood. When summer vacation br ok e out, I ﬂew
them to San Diego to live and train with me. I wok e their
asses up at 4 a.m. and b eat them down on the beach lik e
they wer e in a junior ve rsion of F irst Phase. They did not
enjoy themselves, but they lear ned the truth abo ut what it
tak es to live the ethos. Wher ever I went, whether the
students wer e inter ested  in a military car eer or not, they
always ask ed if they had the same har dwar e I had. Could
they ru n a hundr ed miles  in one day? What would  it tak e to
r each their full potential? This is what I’d tell  them:
Our cu ltur e has become hook ed on the quick - ﬁx , the life
hack, eﬃciency . Everyone is on the hunt for th at simple
action algorithm that nets maximum pr oﬁt with the least
amount of eﬀort. Ther e’s  no denying this attitude may get
you some of the trapping s of success, if you’r e luck y, but it
will not lead to a calloused mind or self - mastery . If you want
to m aster the mind and r e move your gover nor, you ’ll have to
become addicted to h ar d work. Because pas sion and
obsession, ev en talent, ar e only useful tools if you have the
work ethic to back them  up.
My work ethic is the single most important factor in all of my
accomplishments. Everyth ing else is secondary, and when it
comes to har d work, whe ther in the gym or on the job, The
40% R ule applies. T o me, a forty - hour  work week is a 40
per cent eﬀort. It may be satisfactory, but that’s another
wor d for mediocrity . Don’t settle for a forty - hour  work week.
Ther e ar e 168 hours in a week! That means you  have the
hours to put in that e xtra time at work without skimping on
your e x er cise . It means st r eamlining your nutrition, spending
quality time with your wife and kids. It means s cheduling
your life lik e you’r e on a twenty - four - hour  mission every
single  day .The number one e x cuse I hear fr om people as to  why they
don’t w ork o ut as much as they want to is that t hey don’t
have t ime. L ook, we all have work obligations, none of us
want to lose sleep, and you’ll need time with the family or
they’ll trip the fuck out. I get it, and if that’s your  situation,
you must win the  mor ning.
When I was full - time  with the SEALs I maximized the dark
hours befor e dawn. When my wife was sleeping, I would
bang o ut a six - to ten - mile  run. My gear was all laid out the
night befor e, my lunch was pack ed, and my work clothes
wer e in  my lock er at wor k wher e I’d shower befor e my day
started at 7:30 a.m. On a  typical day, I’d be out the door for
my run  just af ter 4 a.m. and back by 5:15 a.m. Since that
wasn’t enough for me, and because we only owned one car, I
r ode my bik e (I ﬁnally got my own shit!) twenty - ﬁve  miles to
work. I ’d wor k fr om 7:30 a.m. to noon, and eat at my desk
befor e or af ter my lunch br eak. During the lunch hour I’d hit
the gy m or do a four - to six - mile  beach run, work the
af ter noon sh if t and hop o n my bik e for the twenty - ﬁve - mile
ride ho me. B y the time I was home at 7 p.m., I’d have run
about ﬁf teen miles, r ock ed ﬁf ty miles on the bik e, and put in
a full day at the oﬃce. I was always home for din ner and in
bed by 10 p.m. so I could do it all over again the  ne xt day .
On Satur day s I’d sleep in until 7 a.m., hit a thr ee - hour
work out, and  spend the r est of the week end with  K ate. If I
didn’t have a race, Sund ays wer e my active r ecovery days.
I’d do an ea sy ride at a low heart rate, k eeping my pulse
below 110 beats per minute to stimulate healthy blood  ﬂow .
Maybe you think I’m a sp ecial case or an obsessive maniac.
F ine, I won’t ar gue with you. But what about my friend Mik e?
He’s a big - time  ﬁn ancial advisor in New Y ork City . His job is
high pr essur e and his work day is a hell of a lot longer than
eight hours. He has a wife and two kids, and he’s an ultra
runner . Her e’ s how he do es it. He wak es up at 4 a .m. everyweekday, runs sixty to ninety minutes each mor ning while
his fam ily is still snoozing , rides a bik e to work and back and
does a  quick  thirty - minute  tr eadm ill run  af ter he ge ts home.
He goes out for longer runs on week ends, but he minimizes
its impact on his family  obligations.
He’s high - power ed , wea lthy as fuck, and could easily
maintain his status quo with less eﬀort and enjoy the sweet
fruits o f his labors, but he ﬁnds a way to stay har d because
his lab ors ar e  his sweetest fruits. And he mak es tim e to get it
all in by minimizing the amount of bullshit clogging his
schedule. His priorities ar e clear, and he r emains dedicated
to his priorities. I’m not t alking about general priorities her e
either . Each hour of his week is dedicated to a particular task
and when that hour show s up in r eal time, he focuses 100
per cent on that task. That’s how I do it too, because that is
the only way to minimize wasted  hours.
Evaluate your life in its t otality! W e all waste so much time
doing meaningless bullshit. W e bur n hours on social media
and wa tching television, w hich by the end of the year would
add up to entir e days and weeks if you tabulated time lik e
you do your tax es. Y ou sh ould, because if you knew the truth
you’d deactivate your F acebook account ST A T, and cut your
cable. When you ﬁnd yourself having frivolous conversations
or b ecoming ensnar ed in  activities that don’t better you in
any way, move the fuck  on!
F or years I’ve lived lik e a monk. I don’t see or spend time
with a lot of people. My cir cle is very tight. I post  on social
media once or twice a week and I never check anybody
else’s feeds because I don’t follow anyone. That’s just me.
I’m not saying you need t o be that unfor giving, because you
and I pr obab ly don’t shar e the same goals. But I know you
have goals too, and r oom for impr ovement, or you wouldn’tbe r eading my book, and I guarantee that if you au dited your
schedule you’d ﬁnd time for mor e work and less  bullshit.
It’s up  to you to ﬁnd ways to eviscerate your bullshit. How
much time do you spend at the dinner table talking about
nothing af ter  the meal is done? How many calls an d te xts do
you send for no r eason at all? L ook at your whole life, list
your o bligations and task s. P ut a time stamp on them. How
many hours ar e r equir ed to shop, eat, and clean? How much
sleep do you need? What’s your commute lik e?  Can you
mak e i t ther e  under your own power? Block everything into
windows of time, and once your day is scheduled out, you’ll
know h ow much ﬂe xibilit y you have to e x er cise on a given
day and how to maximize  it.
P er haps you ar en’t looking to get ﬁt, but have been
dr eaming of starting a business of your own, or have always
wanted to lear n a language or an instrument you’r e
obsessed with. F ine, the same rule applies. Analyze your
schedule, kil l your empty habits, bur n out the bu llshit, and
see what’s lef t. Is it one hour per day? Thr ee? Now  maximize
that sh it. Tha t means listing your prioritized tasks every hour
of the day . Y ou can even nar r ow it down to ﬁf teen - minute
windows, and don’t for get to include backstops in your day -
to - day  schedule. R emember how I for got to include
backstops in my race plan at Ultraman? Y ou need backstops
in your day - to - day  sched ule too . If one task bleeds into
overtime, mak e sur e you know it, and begin to transition into
your ne xt prioritized task straight away . U se your
smartphone for pr oductivity hacks, not click bait. T ur n on
your calendar alerts. Have those alar ms  set.
If you audit your life, skip the bullshit, and use backstops,
you’ll ﬁ nd time to do everything you need and w ant to do .
But r emember that you also need r est, so schedule that in.
Listen to your body, sneak in those ten - to twenty - minutepower naps when necessary, and tak e one full r est day per
week. If it’s a r est day, t ruly allow your mind and body to
r elax. T ur n your phone oﬀ . K eep the computer shut down. A
r est da y means you should be r elax ed, hanging with friends
or f amily, and eating and  drinking well, so you can  r echar ge
and g et bac k at it. It’ s not a day to lose yourself in
technology or stay hunched at your desk in the for m of a
damn question  mark.
The whole point of the twenty - four - hour  mission is to k eep
up a champio nship pace,  not for a season or a ye ar, but for
your e ntir e life! That r equir es quality r est and r ecovery time.
Because ther e is no ﬁnish line. Ther e is always mor e to lear n,
and yo u will always have weaknesses to str ength en if you
want to become as har d a s woodpeck er lips. Har d enough to
hammer countless miles, and ﬁnish that shit  str ong!
* * *
In 200 8, I was back in K ona for the Ir onman W orld
Championships. I was in peak visibility mode for the Navy
SEALs, and Commander K eith Davids, one of the best
athletes I ever saw in the SEAL teams, and I wer e slated to
do the  race. The NB C Sports br oadcast track ed our every
move a nd tu r ned our race within the race into a featur e the
announcers could cut to between clocking the main
contenders.
Our entrance  was straight out of a Hollywood pitch meeting.
While m ost athletes wer e  deep into their pr e - race  rituals and
getting psyched up for the longest day of their racing lives,
we buzzed over head in a C -130, ju mped fr om 1,500 feet, and
parachuted into the water, wher e we wer e scooped up by a
Zodiac and motor ed to shor e just four minutes befor e the
gun. That was bar ely enough time for a blast of ener gy gel, aswig o f water, and to ch ange into our Navy SEAL triathlon
suits.
Y ou know by now that I ’m slow in the water, and Davids
destr oyed my  ass on the 2.4- mile  sw im. I’m ju st as str ong a s
he is on a bi cycle, but my lower back tightened up that day
and at the half way point I  had to stop and str etch out. By the
time I coaste d into the tr ansition ar ea af ter a 112- mile  bik e
ride, Davids had thirty m inutes on me, and early on in the
marathon, I didn’t do a gr eat job of getting any of it back. My
body w as r eb elling and I had to walk those early miles, but I
stayed in the ﬁght, and  at mile ten found a r hythm and
started clipping time. Somewher e ahead of me Davids blew
up, and I inched closer . F or a few miles I could see him
plodding in the distance, suﬀering in those lava ﬁelds, heat
shimmering oﬀ the aspha lt in sheets. I knew he wanted to
beat m e bec ause he was a pr oud man. He was an Oﬃcer, a
gr eat o perator, and a stud athlete. I wanted to bea t him too .
That’s how Navy SEALs ar e wir ed, and I could have blown by
him, b ut as I got closer I told myself to humble up . I caught
him with just over two miles to go . He look ed at me with a
mix of r espect and hilarious  e xasperation.
“ F ucking Goggins,” he sa id with a smile. W e’d jumped into
the water together, starte d the race together, and we wer e
gonna ﬁnish this thing together . W e ran side by si de for the
ﬁnal two miles, cr ossed the ﬁnish line, and hugged it out. It
was ter riﬁc fucking  television.A t the K ona Ir onman ﬁnish line with K eith Davids* * *
Everything w as going well in my life. My car eer was spit -
shined  an d gleaming, I’d made  a name for myself in the
sports world,  and I had plans to get back onto the battleﬁeld
lik e a Navy S EAL should. But sometimes, even whe n you ar e
doing everything right in life, shit stor ms appear and
multiply . Chaos can and will descend without war ning, and
when ( not if) that happens, ther e won’t be anything you can
do to stop  it.
If you’r e fortunate, the iss ues or injuries ar e r elatively minor,
and wh en those incidents  cr op up it’s on you to adjust and
stay af ter it. If you get in jur ed or other complicat ions arise
that pr event you fr om working on your primary passion,
r efocus your  ener gy elsewher e. The activities w e pursue
tend to  be our str engths because its fun to do what we’r e
gr eat at. V ery few people enjoy working on their weaknesses,
so if you’r e a ter riﬁc ru nner with a knee injury that will
pr event you fr om running  for twelve weeks, that is a gr eat
time to get into yoga, in cr easing your ﬂe xibility and your
overall str en gth, which will mak e you a better and less
injury - pr one  athlet e. If you’r e a guitar player with a br ok en
hand, sit down at the k eys and use your one good hand to
become a mor e versatile musician. The point is not to allow a
setback to shatter our focus, or our detours to dictate our
mindset. Always be r eady to adjust, r ecalibrate, and stay
af ter it to become better, somehow .
The sole r eason I work out lik e I do isn’t to pr epa r e for and
win ult ra rac es. I don’t ha ve an athletic motive at all. It’s to
pr epar e my mind for life itself . Life will always be  the most
grueling endurance sport, and when you train har d, get
uncomfortable, and callous your mind, you will become a
mor e versatile competitor, trained to ﬁnd a way f orwar d no
matter what. Because ther e will be times when the shit lifethr ows at you isn’t minor at all. Sometimes life hits  you dead
in the fucking  heart.
My two - year  stint on r ecruitment detail was due to end in
2009, and while I enjoyed  my time inspiring the n e xt gen, I
was loo king forwar d to getting back out and operating in the
ﬁeld. But befor e I lef t my post I planned one mor e big splash.
I w ould ride a bicycle fr om the beach in San Diego to
Annapolis, M aryland, in a legendary endurance r oad race,
the R ace A cr oss America. The race was in June, so fr om
January to May I spent all my fr ee time on the bik e. I wok e up
at 4  a.m. and r ode 110 miles befor e work, then r o de twenty
to thirty miles home at the end of a long work day . On
week ends I put in at least one 200- mile  d ay, and averaged
over 7 00 miles per week. The race would tak e about two
weeks to complete, ther e  would be very little sleep involved,
and I wanted  to be r eady  for the gr eatest athletic challenge
of my entir e  life.My R A AM training log
Then in early May everything capsized. Lik e a malfunctioning
appliance, my heart went on the blink, almost over night. F or
years my r esting pulse rate was in the thirties. Suddenly it
was in the seventies and eighties and any activity would
spik e it until I ver ged on collapse. It was as if I’d sprung a
leak, and all my ener gy had been suck ed fr om m y body . A
simple ﬁve - minute  bik e ride would send my heart racing to
150 beats per minute. It pounded uncontr ollably during a
short walk up a single ﬂight of  stairs.A t ﬁ rst I thou ght it was fr o m overtraining and when  I went to
the doctor, he agr eed, but scheduled an echocar diogram for
me at Balboa  Hospital just in case. When I went in for the
test, th e tech  gelled up h is all - knowing  r eceiver and r olled it
over my chest to get the angles he’d need while I lay on my
lef t sid e, my head away fr om his monitor . He was a talk er
and k e pt bullshitting abo ut a whole lot of nothing while he
check ed out all my chambers and valves. Everything look ed
solid, he said, until suddenly, forty - ﬁve  m inutes into the
pr ocedur e, th is chatty motherfuck er stopped talking. Instead
of his voice, I hear d a lot of clicking and zooming. Then he
lef t th e r oom  and r eappear ed with another te ch a few
minutes late r . They click ed, zoomed, and whisp er ed, but
didn’t let me in on their big  secr et.
When people in white coats ar e tr eating your heart as a
puzzle to be solved right in fr ont of you, it’s har d not to think
that you’r e pr obably pr etty fuck ed up. P art of me wanted
answers immediately, because I was scar ed as s hit, but I
didn’t want to be a bitch and show my car ds, so I opted to
stay c alm a nd let the pr ofessionals work. W ith in a few
minutes two other men walk ed into the r oom. One of them
was a car diologist. He took over the wand, r olled it on my
chest, and peer ed into th e monitor with one short nod. Then
he pat ted me on the shoulder lik e I was his fucking inter n,
and said, “ Ok ay, let’s  talk.”
“Y ou have an A trial Septal Defect,” he said as we stood in the
hallway, his techs and nurses pacing back and forth,
disappearing into and r eappearing fr om r ooms on either side
of us. I star ed straight ahead and said nothing until he
r ealized I had no idea wh at the fuck he was talking about.
“Y ou h ave a hole in your heart.” He scrunched his  for ehead
and str ok ed his chin. “ A pr etty good - sized  one  too .”
“ Holes don’t just open in your heart, do  they?”“No, no,” he said with a laugh, “ you wer e bor n with  it.”
He wen t on to e xplain that the hole was in the wal l between
my rig ht and lef t atria, w hich was a pr oblem because when
you h ave a  hole between the chambers in your heart,
o xygenated blood mix es with the non - o xygenated  blood.
Oxygen is an essential element that every single one of our
cells needs to survive. A ccor ding to the doctor, I was only
supplying about half of the necessary o xygen my muscles
and or gans needed for optimal  perfor mance.
That l eads to swelling in the feet and abdomen, heart
palpitations, and occasional bouts of shortness of br eath. It
certainly e xplained the fatigue I’d been feeling r ecently . It
also impacts the lungs,  he said, because it ﬂoods the
pulmonary blood vessels with mor e blood than they can
handle, whic h mak es it m uch mor e diﬃcult to r ecover fr om
over e x ertion and illness. I  ﬂashed back to all the issues I had
r ecovering a f ter contract ing double pneumonia d uring my
ﬁrst H ell W eek. The ﬂuid I had in my lungs never fully
r eceded. During subsequent Hell W eeks, and af ter getting
into ultras, I found myse lf hocking up phlegm during and
af ter ﬁnishing  races. Some nights, ther e was so much ﬂuid in
me I couldn’t sleep. I’d just sit up and spit phlegm into empty
Gatorade bottles, wondering when that boring ritual would
play itself out. Most people, when they become ultra
obsessed, may deal with overuse injuries, but their
car diovascular system is ﬁnely tuned. Even though I was
able to compete and acc omplish so much with my br ok en
body, I never felt that gr eat. I’d lear ned to endur e and
over come, and as the doctor continued to download the
essentials I r ealized that f or the ﬁrst time in my entir e life, I’d
also been pr etty fucking luck y . Y ou know, the backhanded
brand of luck wher e you have a hole in your heart, but ar e
thanking God that it hasn’t killed you…yet.Because when you have an ASD lik e mine and you dive deep
under water, gas bubbles, which ar e supposed to travel
thr ough the pulmonary blood vessels to be ﬁlter ed thr ough
the lungs, might leak fr om that hole upon ascent, and
r ecir culate as weaponized embolisms that can clog blood
vessels in the brain and lead to a str ok e, or block an artery
to t he heart, and cause c ar diac ar r est. It’s lik e diving with a
dirty bomb ﬂoating inside  you, never knowing when or wher e
it might go  oﬀ.
I wa sn’t alone in this ﬁght. One out of every ten ch ildr en ar e
bor n w ith this  same defect, but in most cases the hole closes
on its own, and sur gery isn’t r equir ed. In just under 2,000
American childr en each year, sur gery is r equir ed, but is
usually administer ed befor e a patient starts schoo l, because
ther e ar e better scr eening pr ocesses these da ys. Most
people my age who wer e bor n with ASD lef t the hospital in
their mothers’ ar ms and lived with a potential deadly
pr oblem without a clue. Until, lik e me, their heart started
giving them tr ouble in t heir thirties. If I had ig nor ed my
war ning signs, I could have dr opped dead during a four - mile
run.
That’s why if you’r e in the military and ar e diagnos ed with an
ASD, you can’t jump out of airplanes or scuba di ve, and if
anyone had known of my  condition ther e is no way the Navy
ever w ould have let me become a SEAL. It’s astonishing I
even m ade it thr ough Hell W eek, Badwater, or any of those
other  races.
“I’m truly amazed you c ould do all you’ve done with this
condition,” the doctor  said.
I n odded. He thought I was a medical marvel, som e kind of
outlier, or simply a gif ted  athlete blessed with amazing luck.
T o me, it wa s just further evidence that I didn’t owe my
accomplishments to God - given  t al ent or gr e at genetics. I hada fucking hole in my heart! I was running o n a tank
perpetually h alf full, and that meant my life was  absolute
pr oof of what’s possible when someone dedicates
themselves to har nessing the full power of the human  mind.
Thr ee days later I was in  sur gery .
And b oy did the doctor fuck that one up. F irst oﬀ, the
anesthesia d idn’t tak e all the way, which meant I was half
awak e as the sur geon sliced into my inner thigh, inserted a
catheter into my femora l artery, and once it r eached my
heart, deployed a helix patch thr ough that catheter and
moved it into place, supposedly patching the h ole in my
heart. Meanw hile, they had a camera down my thr oat, which
I co uld feel as I gagged and struggled to endur e  the two -
hour - long  pr ocedur e. A f ter all of that, my tr oubles wer e
supposed to have been over . The doctor mentioned that it
would tak e time for my heart tissue to gr ow ar ound  and seal
the patch, but af ter a week he clear ed me for light  e x er cise.
R oger that, I thought, as I dr opped to the ﬂoor to d o a set of
push - ups  as  soon as I got home. Almost immediately m y
heart went into atrial ﬁbrillation, also known as a - ﬁb . My
pulse spik ed fr om 120 to 230, back to 120 then up to 250. I
felt diz zy and had to sit down as I star ed at my heart rate
monitor, while my br eat hing nor malized. Once again my
r esting heart rate was in the eighties. In other wor ds, nothing
had changed . I called the car diologist who tagged it a minor
side eﬀect and begged p atience. I took him at his wor d and
r ested for a few mor e days then hopped on the bik e for an
easy r ide home fr om work. A t ﬁrst all went well but af ter
about ﬁf teen miles, my heart went into a - ﬁb  o nce again. My
pulse rate bounced fr om 120 to 230 and back again acr oss
the im aginary graph in my mind’s eye with no r hythm
whatsoever . K ate dr ove me straight to Balboa Hospital. A f ter
that visit, and second and thir d opinions, it was clear that thepatch had either failed or  was insuﬃcient to cover the entir e
hole, and that I’d need a second heart  sur gery .
The Na vy didn’t want any part of that. They fear ed further
complications and suggested I scale back my lifestyle,
accept my new nor mal, and a r etir ement pack age. Y eah,
right. Instead, I found a better doctor at Balboa who said
we’d have to wait seve ral months befor e we could even
contemplate another heart sur gery . In the meantime, I
couldn’t jump or dive, and obviously couldn’t oper ate in the
ﬁeld, s o I stayed in r ecr uitment. It was a diﬀer ent life, no
doubt, and I was tempted  to feel sor ry for myself . A f ter all,
this thing that hit me out of the clear blue changed the entir e
landscape of my military car eer, but I’d been training for life,
not ultra races, and I r efused to hang my  head.
I kn ew that if I maintained  a victim’s mentality I wo uldn’t get
anything at all out of a fuck ed - up  s ituati on, and I didn’t wa nt
to s it home defeated all  day long. So I used the time to
perfect my r ecruitment pr esentation. I wr ote up sterling
A ARs and became much mor e detail oriented in my
administrative work. Does that sound boring to you? F uck
yes, it was b oring! But it was honest, necessary w ork, and I
used it  to k eep my mind sharp for when the mom ent came
that I’d be able to dr op back into the ﬁght for  r eal.
Or so I  hoped.
A f ull fourteen months a f ter the ﬁrst sur gery, I was once
again r olling thr ough a hospital cor ridor on my back, staring
at the ﬂuor escent lights in  the ceiling, headed to pr e - op , with
no gua rantees. While the techs and nurses shaved  me down
and pr epped me up, I tho ught about all I’d accomplished in
the military and wonde r ed, was it enough? If the docs
couldn’t ﬁx me this time would I be willing to r etir e,
satisﬁed? That question linger ed in my head until the
anesthesiologist placed an o xygen mask over my face andcounted down sof tly in my ear . Just befor e lights o ut, I hear d
the answer erupt fr om the abyss of my jet - black  soul.
F uck  no!A f ter second heart sur geryC H A L L E N G E  # 8
Schedule it  in!
It’s tim e to compartmenta lize your day . T oo many of us have
become multitask ers, and that’s cr eated a nation of half -
asses . This will be a thr ee - week  challenge. During week one,
go about your nor mal sc hedule, but tak e notes. When do
you work? Ar e you working nonstop or checking your phone
(the M oment app will tell you)? How long ar e your meal
br eaks? When do you e x er cise, watch TV, or chat to friends?
How long is your commu te? Ar e you driving? I wa nt you to
get super detailed and document it all with timestamps.
This will be your baseline, and you’ll ﬁnd plenty of fat to
trim. M ost people waste four to ﬁve hours on a given day,
and if you can lear n to i dentif y and utilize it, you’ll be on
your way towar d incr eased  pr oductivity .
In wee k two, build an optimal schedule. L ock everything into
place in ﬁf teen - to thirty - minute  blo cks. Some tasks will ta k e
multiple blocks or entir e days. F ine. When you work, only
work o n one thing at a time, think about the task in fr ont of
you and pursue it r elentlessly . When it comes time for the
ne xt task on your schedu le, place that ﬁrst one a side, and
apply the same  focus.
Mak e sur e your meal br eaks ar e adequate but not open -
ended , a nd schedu le in e x er cise and r est too . But when it’s
time to  r est, actually r est . No checking email or bu llshitting
on s ocial media. If you ar e going to work har d you must also
r est your  brain.Mak e notes with timestam ps in week two . Y ou may  still ﬁnd
some r esidual dead space . By week thr ee, you sho uld have
a wor king s chedule that maximizes your eﬀort without
sacriﬁcing sleep. P ost photos of your schedule, with the
hashtags #canthurtme #talentnotr equir ed.C H A P T E R  N I N E
9 .  UNCOMMON AMONGST
UNCOMMON
T HE  ANESTHESIA  TOOK  HOLD , AND  I FEL T  MYSELF  WHEELING  BA CK W ARD  UNTIL  I
landed in a scene fr om m y past. W e wer e humping thr ough
the jun gle in the dead of night. Our movement wa s stealthy
and sil ent, b ut swif t. Had to be. He who hits ﬁrst wins the
ﬁght, most of the  time.
W e cr e sted a pass, took shelter beneath a thick stand of
towering mahogany tr ees in the triple canopy jungle, and
track ed our tar gets thr ough night vision goggles. Even
without sunli ght, the tr opical heat was intense and sweat slid
down the side of my face lik e dew dr ops on a window pane. I
was twenty - seven  years old, and my Platoon  and Rambo
fever dr eam s had become r eal as fuck. I blink ed twice,
e xhaled, and on the OIC’s signal, opened  ﬁr e.
My entir e body r everberated with the r hythm of the M60, a
belt - fed  machine gun, ﬁring 500–650 r ounds per minute. As
the one - hundr ed - r ound  belt fed the gr owling machine and
ﬂar ed fr om the bar r el, a dr enaline ﬂooded my bloodstr eam
and saturated my brain. My focus nar r owed. Ther e was
nothing else but me, my weapon, and the tar get I was
shr edding with zer o  apologies.It w as 2002, I was fr esh o ut of BUD/S, and as a full - time  Navy
SEAL, I was now oﬃcially one of the world’s most ﬁt and
deadly war riors and one of the har dest men alive. Or so I
thought, but this was years befor e my descent into the ultra
rabbit hole. September 11th was still a fr esh, gaping wound
in the  Amer ican collective consciousness, and its ripple
eﬀects changed everything for guys lik e us. Comb at was no
longer a mythical state of  mind we aspir ed to . It was r eal and
ongoing in the mountains, villages, and cities of A fghanistan.
Meanwhile, we wer e moor ed in fucking Malaysia, awaiting
or ders, hoping to join the  ﬁght.
And we trained lik e  it.
A f ter BUD/S, I moved on to SEAL Qualiﬁcation T raining, wher e
I oﬃcially ear ned my T rident befor e landing in my ﬁrst
platoon. T raining continued with jungle warfar e e x er cises in
Malaysia. W e rappelled and fast - r oped  up and down fr om
hovering helicopters. Some men wer e trained as snipers, and
since I  was the biggest man in the unit—my weight was back
up to 250 po unds by then—I scor ed the job of car rying the
P ig, the nickname for the  M60 because it sounded lik e the
grunt of a bar nyar d  hog.SQT graduation (note the blood stains fr om the T rident being punched into my
chest)
Most p eople dr eaded P ig detail, but I was obsessed with that
gun. Th e weapon alone was twenty pounds, and each belt ofone - hundr ed  r ounds weighed in at seven pounds. I car ried
six to seven of those (one on the gun, four on my waist, and
one in a pou ch strapped to my rucksack), the weapon, and
my ﬁf ty - pound  ruck everyw her e we went and was e xpected
to mov e just  as fast as everyone else. I had no choice. W e
train a s we ﬁght, and live ammo is necessary to mimic true
combat so we could perf ect the SEAL battle maxim: shoot,
move, communicate.
That meant k eeping bar r el discr etion on point. W e couldn’t
let our  weap on spray just anywher e. That’s how friendly ﬁr e
incidents happen, and it tak es gr eat muscle discipline and
attention to detail to know  wher e you’r e aiming in r elation to
the loc ation of your teammates at all times, especially when
ar med with the P ig. Maintaining a high standar d of safety
and delivering deadly for ce on - tar get  wh en duty c alls is what
mak es an average SEAL a good  operator .
Most people think once y ou’r e a SEAL you’r e always in the
cir cle, but that’s not true. I lear ned quickly that we wer e
constantly being judged, and the second I was unsafe,
whether I was still a new guy or a veteran operator, I’d be
out! I was on e of thr ee new guys in my ﬁrst platoon , and one
of t hem had to have his g un tak en away because he was so
unsafe. F or ten days, we moved thr ough the Malaysian
jungle, sleep ing in hammocks, paddling dugouts, car rying
our weapons all day and night, and he was stuck  hauling a
fucking br oom stick lik e the W ick ed W itch of the W est. Even
then h e couldn’t hack it and wound up getting booted. Our
oﬃcers in that ﬁrst platoon k ept everybody honest, and I
r espected them for  it.
“In combat, nobody just t ur ns into R ambo,” Dana De Coster
told m e r ecently . Dana was second in command on my ﬁrst
platoon with SEAL T eam F ive. These days he’s Dir ector of
Operations at BUD/S. “W e push ourselves har d so whenbullets do start ﬂying we  fall back on r eally good  training,
and it’s important that the point wher e we fall b ack is so
high, w e know we’r e gonna outperfor m the enemy . W e may
not become R ambo, but we’ll be damn  close.”
A lot of peop le ar e fascinated by the weaponry and gunﬁghts
SEALs utilize and engage  in, but that was never my favorite
part of  the job. I was damn good at it, but I pr efe r r ed going
to war with m yself . I’m talking about str ong physica l training,
and my ﬁrst platoon deliv er ed that too . W e would g o on long
run - swim - runs  most mor nings befor e w ork. W e wer en’t just
getting miles in either . W e wer e competing, and our oﬃcers
led fr o m the fr ont. Our OIC and Dana, his second,  wer e two
of the best athletes in the entir e platoon and my Platoon
Chief, Chris Beck (who no w goes by Kristin Beck, and is one
of mos t famous trans women on T witter; talk about being the
only! ), was a har d motherfuck er  too .
“It’s fu nny,” Dana said, “[the OIC and I] never r eally talk ed
about our philosophy on PT . W e just competed. I wanted to
beat him and he wanted  to beat me, and that got people
talking about how har d we wer e getting af ter  it.”
Ther e was never a doubt in my mind that Dana was oﬀ his
damn r ock er . I r emember befor e we shipped out for
Indonesia, w ith stops in Guam, Malaysia, Thai land, and
K or ea, we did a number of training dives oﬀ San Clemente
Island. Dana was my swim buddy, and one mor ning he
challenged me to do a training dive in ﬁf ty - ﬁve - degr ee  water
without a wetsuit because that’s how the pr edecessors to
the SE ALs did it when they pr epar ed the beaches in
Nor mandy for the famous D - Day  invasion during W orld W ar
II.
“ L et’s go old school and dive in shorts with our dive knives,”
he  said.He had the animalistic mentality I thrived on, and I wasn’t
about to back down fr om that challenge. W e swam and dove
together all over Southeast Asia, wher e we trained elite
military units in Malaysia  and sharpened the skills of Thai
Navy S EALs—the cr ew of fr ogmen who saved the soccer kids
in the cave in the summer of 2018. They wer e engaged with
an Islamist insur gency in South Thailand. Whe r ever we
deployed, I loved those PT mor nings above all else. P r etty
soon, every man in that platoon was competing against
everyone else, but no matter how har d I tried I couldn’t seem
to catc h our two oﬃcers and usually came in thir d place.
Didn’t matter . It wasn ’t important who won  because
everybody was capping personal bests almost every day,
and th at’s what stayed with me. The power of a competitive
envir onment to amp up an entir e platoon’s commitment and
achievement!
This was e xactly the envir onment I’d been dr eaming of when
I class ed up for BUD/S. W e wer e all living the SEAL ethos,
and I couldn’t wait to see wher e it took us individually and as
a u nit once we tagged into the ﬁght. But as war raged in
A fghanistan, all we coul d do was sit tight and hope our
number was  called.
W e we r e in a K or ean bo wling alley when we watched the
invasion of Iraq together . It was depr essing as hell. W e had
been training har d for an opportunity lik e that. Our
foundation ha d been r einfor ced with all that PT, and ﬁlled out
with r obust weapons and tactical training. W e’d become a
deadly unit fr othing to be  a part of the action, and the fact
that we wer e passed over again pissed us all oﬀ. So we took
it out on one another every  mor ning.
Navy SEALs wer e tr eated lik e r ock stars at the bases we
visited ar ound the world, and some of the guys partied lik e
it. In fact, mo st SEALs enjoyed their shar e of big nights out,but not me. I’d gotten into the SEALs by living a Spartan
lifestyle and felt my job a t night was to r est, r ech ar ge, and
get my  body  and mind ri ght for battle again the n e xt day . I
was for ever mission - r eady , an d my att itude ear ned r espect
fr om some, but our OIC tried to inﬂuence me to let go a little
and become “ one of the  boys.”
I ha d gr eat r espect for o ur OIC. He’d graduated  fr om the
Naval A cademy and the University of Cambridge. He was
clearly smart, a stud athlete, and a gr eat leader, o n his way
to clai ming a coveted spot on DEVGRU, so his opinion
matter ed to me. It matter ed to all of us, becaus e he was
r esponsible for evaluating us and those evaluations have a
way of following you ar ound and aﬀecting your military
car eer going  forwar d.
On pap er, m y ﬁrst evaluation was solid. He was impr essed
with my skills and all - out  eﬀort,  but he also dr oppe d some oﬀ
the r ecor d wisdom. “Y ou know, Goggins,” he said, “ you’d
understand the job a little better if you hung ou t with the
guys mor e. That’s when I lear n the most about operating in
the ﬁeld, hanging with the boys, hearing their stories. It’s
important to be part of the  gr oup.”
His wor ds wer e a r eality  check that hurt. Clearly, the OIC,
and pr obably some of the other guys, thought I w as a little
diﬀer ent. Of course I wa s! I came fr om fucking nothing! I
didn’t get r ecruited to the  Naval A cademy . I didn’t e ven know
wher e the fuck Cambridge  was. I wasn’t raised ar ound pools.
I had to teach myself to swim. F uck, I shouldn’t have even
been a SEAL, but I made it, and I thought that  ma de me pa rt
of t he gr oup, but now I r e alized I was part of the T eams—not
the  br other hood.
I ha d to go out and socialize with the guys af ter hours to
pr ove my value? That was a big ask for an intr overt lik e  me.F uck  that.
I’d ar ri ved in that platoon because of my intense dedication
and I wasn’t about to let u p. While people wer e out at night I
was r eading up on tactics, weaponry, and war . I was a
perpetual student! In my mind I was training for
opportunities that didn’t even e xist yet. Back then you
couldn’t scr een to join DEVGRU until af ter you ﬁnished your
second platoon, but I was alr eady pr eparing for that
opportunity, and I r efus ed to compr omise who I was to
confor m to their unwritten  rules.
DEVGRU (and the Ar my’s Delta F or ce) ar e consider ed the
very b est within the best of special operations. They get the
tip of the spear missions, lik e the Osama Bin Laden raid, and
fr om t hat point on, I de cided I wouldn’t and couldn’t be
satisﬁed just being a vanilla Navy SEAL. Y eah, we wer e all
uncommon, har d motherfuck ers compar ed to civilians, but
now I saw I w as uncommo n even among the uncommon, and
if that’s who I was, then so the fuck be it. I may as well
separate myself even mo r e. Not long af ter that evaluation, I
won the mor ning race fo r the ﬁrst time. I passed  up Dana
and the OIC in the last half mile and never look ed  back.
Platoon assig nments last for two years, and by the end of
our deployment most of the guys wer e r eady for a br eather
befor e tacklin g their ne xt platoon, which judging by the wars
we wer e involved in wer e almost guaranteed to tak e them
into combat. I didn’t want or need a br eak because the
uncommon among uncommon don’t tak e  br eaks!
A f ter my ﬁrst evaluation I started studying the other
branches in the military (C oast Guar d not included ) and r ead
up o n their sp ecial for ces. Navy SEALs lik e to think that we’r e
the best of them all, but I wanted to see for myself . I
suspected all the branches employed a few individuals who
stood o ut in the worst envir onments. I was on a hunt to ﬁndand tra in with those guys because I knew they could mak e
me bet ter . Plus, I’d r ead th at Ar my R anger School was known
as one of the best, if not the best, leadership schools in the
entir e militar y, so during my ﬁrst platoon, I put seven chits in
with m y OIC hoping to g et appr oval to go to Ar my R anger
School betw een deploym ents. I wanted to sponge mor e
knowledge, I told him, and become mor e skilled as a special
operator .
Chits ar e special r equests, and my ﬁrst six wer e ignor ed. I
was a new gu y, af ter all, and some thought my focus should
r emain within Naval Special W arfar e, rather than stray into
the dr e aded Ar my . But I’d ear ned my own r eputation af ter
serving two years in m y ﬁrst platoon, and my seventh
r equest went up the ladder to the CO in char ge of Seal T eam
F ive. When he signed oﬀ, I was  in.
“ Goggins,” my OIC said af ter giving me the good news, “ you
ar e the type of motherfuck er who wishes you wer e a POW
just to see if you have what it tak es to  last.”
He was  onto me. He knew the kind of person I was becoming
—the type of man willin g to challenge myself to the nth
degr ee. W e shook hands.  The OIC was oﬀ to DEVGRU, and
ther e was a chance we’d meet ther e soon. He tol d me that
with two ongoing wars,  for the ﬁrst time DEVGRU had
opened their r ecruitment pr ocess to include guys oﬀ their
ﬁrst platoon. By always se ar ching for mor e and pr eparing my
mind and body for oppor tunities that didn’t yet e xist, I was
one of a handful of men on the W est Coast appr oved by SEAL
T eam F ive brass to scr e en for Gr een T eam, the training
pr ogram for DEVGRU, just befor e I lef t for Ar my R anger
School.
The Gr een T eam scr eening pr ocess unfolds over two days.
The ﬁrst day is the physical ﬁtness portion, which included a
thr ee - mile  run, a 1,200- meter  swim, thr ee minutes of sit - upsand push - ups , and a max set of pull - ups . I smok ed
everybody, b ecause my ﬁrst platoon had made me a much
str onger swimmer and a better runner . Day two was the
interview, which was mor e lik e an inter r ogation. Only thr ee
men fr om my scr eening class of eighteen guys wer e
appr oved for Gr een T eam. I was one of them, which
theor etically meant that af ter my second platoon I’d be one
step c loser to joining DEVGRU. I could har dly wait. It was
December 2003, and as imagined, my special for ces car eer
was zooming into hyperspace because I k ept pr oving myself
to be the most uncommon of motherfuck ers, and r emained
on track to become that One  W ar rior .
A f ew weeks later, I ar r ived in F ort Benning, Geor gia, for
Ar my R anger School. It was early December, and as the only
Navy guy in a class o f 308 men, I was gr e eted with
sk epticism by the instructors because a few classes befor e
mine, a couple of Navy S EALs quit in the middle of training.
Back then they used to send Navy SEALs to R anger School as
punishment, so they may not have been the best
r epr esentatives. I’d been begging to go, but the instructors
didn’t know that yet. They thought I was just another cock y
special ops guy . W ithin hours they stripped me and everyone
else of our u nifor ms and r eputations until we all look ed the
same. Oﬃcers lost rank, and minted special for ces war riors
lik e me became nobodies with a hell of a lot to  pr ove.
On day  one, we wer e sp lit into thr ee companies and I was
appointed ﬁr st ser geant in command of Bravo company . I got
the job because the original ﬁrst ser geant had been ask ed to
r ecite t he R anger Cr eed af ter a beat down on the pull - up  bar,
and he  was so tir ed he fu ck ed it up. T o R angers, t heir cr eed
is e verything . Our R anger Instructor (RI) was livid as he took
stock of Bravo company, all of us lock ed at  attention.“I d on’t know wher e you think you men ar e, but if y ou e xpect
to become R angers then I e xpect you to know our cr eed.” His
eyes found me. “I know  for a fact Old Navy her e doesn’t
know the R anger  Cr eed.”
I’d bee n studying it for months and could have r ecited it
while standing on my head. F or eﬀect, I clear ed my thr oat
and got  loud.
“ R ecognizing that I volunteer ed as a R anger, fully knowing
the ha zar ds o f my chosen pr ofession, I will always endeavor
to uph old the pr estige, honor, and high spirit de co rps of the
R angers!”
“V ery surpri…” He tried to cut me oﬀ, but I wasn’t  done.
“ A cknowledging the fact that a R anger is a mor e el ite Soldier
who ar rives at the cutting edge of battle by land, sea, or air, I
accept the fact that as a  R anger my country e xpects me to
move further, faster, and ﬁght har der than any other
Solider!”
The RI nodded with a wry smile, but this time stayed out of
my  way .
“Never shall I fail my comrades! I will always k eep myself
mentally alert, physically str ong, and morally straight, and I
will sh oulder mor e than my shar e of the task whatever it
may be, 100 per cent and then  some!
“ Gallantly wil l I show the world that I am a specially selected
and well - trained  Soldier! My courtesy to superior oﬃcers,
neatness of dr ess, and car e of equipment sha ll set the
e xample for others to  follow!
“Ener getically will I meet the enemies of my country! I shall
defeat them on the ﬁeld of battle for I am better tr ained andwill ﬁg ht with  all my migh t! Sur r ender is not a R ang er wor d! I
will never leave a fallen comrade to fall into the hands of the
enemy and under no cir cumstances will I ever embar rass my
country!
“ R eadily will I display the intestinal fortitude r equir ed to ﬁght
on to the R an ger objective and complete the mission though
I be the lone  survivor!
“ R angers lead the  way!”
I r ecite d all six stanzas, and af terwar d he shook h is head in
disbelief, and mulled the  ideal way to get the last laugh.
“ Congratulations, Goggins,” he said, “ you ar e now ﬁrst
ser geant.”
He lef t  me ther e, in fr ont  of my platoon, speechless. It was
now m y job to mar ch o ur platoon ar ound and mak e sur e
every man was pr epar ed for whatever lay in fr ont of us. I
became part boss, part big br other, and full - time  quasi -
instructor . I n R anger S chool it’s har d enough to get yoursel f
squar ed awa y enough to graduate. Now I had to look af ter a
hundr ed men  and mak e sur e they had their shit together,
too .
Plus, I still had to go thr ough the same evolutions as
everyone els e, but that was the easy part and act ually gave
me a chance to chill out . F or me the physical pu nishment
was mor e than manage able, but the way I went about
accomplishing those physical tasks had shif ted. In BUD/S I’d
always lead my boat cr ews, of ten with tough love, but in
general I didn’t car e how  the guys in the other boat cr ews
wer e d oing o r if they quit.  This time, I wasn’t just putting out,
I was also lo oking af ter everybody . If I saw someone having
tr ouble with navigation, p atr olling, k eeping up on a run, or
staying awak e all night, I made sur e we all rallied together to
help. Not everybody wanted to . The training was so diﬃcultthat when some guys wer en’t on the clock being graded,
they did the bar e minimu m and found opportunities to r est
and hide. In my sixty - nine  days at R anger School I didn’t
coast for a single second. I was becoming a true  leader .
The w hole point of R anger School is to give every man a
taste of what it tak es to lead a high - level  team. The ﬁeld
e x er cises wer e lik e an operator’s scavenger hunt blended
with a n endurance race. Over the course of six testing
phases we wer e evaluated on navigation, weapons, r ope
techniques, r econnaissance, and overall leadership. The ﬁeld
tests wer e notorious for their Spartan brutality and capped
thr ee separate phases of  training.
F irst, we wer e split into gr oups of twelve men and together
spent ﬁve days and four nights in the foothills for F ort
Benning phase. W e wer e given very little food to eat—one or
two M REs per day—and only a couple of hours sleep per
night, as we raced the clock to navigate cr oss - country  ter rain
between stations wher e we’d knock oﬀ a series of tasks to
pr ove our pr oﬁciency in a particular skill. L eaders hip in the
gr oup r otated between  men.
Mountain pha se was e xponentially har der than F ort Benning.
Now we wer e gr ouped into teams of twenty - ﬁve  men to
navigate the mountains in north Geor gia, and buddy,
Appalachia g ets cold as fuck in wintertime. I’d r e ad stories
about black soldiers with Sickle Cell T rait dying during
Mountain Phase, and the  Ar my wanted me to wear special
dog tags with a r ed casin g to alert medics if something went
wr ong, but I was leading men and didn’t want m y cr ew to
think of me as some sic kly child, so the r ed cas ing never
quite found its way to my dog  tags.
In t he mountains we lear ned how to rappel and r ock climb,
among other  mountainee ring skills, and became pr oﬁcient in
ambush tech niques and mountain patr ol. T o pr ove it we wentout on two separate, four - night  ﬁ eld trainin g e x er cises ,
known as F TXs. A stor m blew in during our second F TX.
Thirty - mile - per - hour  wi nds howled with ice and snow . W e
didn’t haul sleeping bags or war m clothes, and aga in we had
very little food. All we could use to k eep war m was a poncho
liner and one another, which was an issue bec ause the
rancid odor in the air was our own. W e’d bur ned  so many
calories without pr oper nutrition, we’d lost all our fat and
wer e incinera ting our own muscle mass for fuel. The putrid
stink m ade our eyes water . It trigger ed the gag r eﬂe x.
V isibility nar r owed to a few feet. Guys wheezed, coughed,
and jackham mer ed, their eyes wide with ter r or . I thought for
sur e someone was gonna die fr om fr ostbite, hypother mia, or
pneumonia that  night.
Whenever you stop to sleep during ﬁeld tests, r est is brief
and you’r e r equir ed to maintain security in four dir ections,
but in the fa ce of that stor m, Bravo platoon buckled. These
wer e g enerally very har d  men with a ton of pride, but they
wer e focused on survival above all else. I understood the
impulse, and the instructors didn’t mind because w e wer e in
weather emer gency mode, but to me that pr esented an
opportunity t o stand apart and lead by e xample. I look ed at
that winter stor m as a platfor m to become uncommon
among uncommon  men.
No m atter who you ar e, life will pr esent you similar
opportunities wher e you can pr ove to be uncommon. Ther e
ar e pe ople in all walks of life who r elish those moments, and
when I see them I r ecogni ze them immediately because they
ar e usually that motherfu ck er who’s all by himself . It’s the
suit who’s still at the oﬃce at midnight while everyone else
is at the bar, or the bada ss who hits the gym dir ectly af ter
coming oﬀ a forty - eight - hour  op. She’s the wildland
ﬁr eﬁghter who instead of hitting her bedr oll, sharpens her
chainsaw af t er working a ﬁr e for twenty - four  hours. Thatmentality is ther e for all of us. Man, woman, straight, gay,
black, white,  or purple fuc king polk adot. All of us can be the
person who ﬂies all day and night only to ar rive home to a
ﬁlthy house, and instead of blaming family or r oommates,
cleans it up right then be cause they r efuse to ignor e duties
undone.
All ove r the world amazing human beings lik e that e xist. It
doesn’t tak e wearing a unifor m. It’s not about all the har d
schools they graduated fr om, all their patches and medals.
It’s about wanting it lik e ther e’s no tomor r ow—because ther e
might not be. It’s about thinking of everybody e lse befor e
yourself and developing your own code of ethics that sets
you apart fr om others. O ne of those ethics is the drive to
tur n ev ery negative into a positive, and then when shit starts
ﬂying, being pr epar ed to lead fr om the  fr ont.
My thinking on that Geor gia mountaintop was that, in a r eal -
world  s cena rio, a stor m lik e that would pr ovide the pe rfect
cover for an enemy attack, so I didn’t gr oup up and seek
war mth. I dialed deeper,  welcomed the car nage of ice and
snow, and held the wester n perimeter lik e it was my duty—
because it damn well wa s! And I loved every seco nd of it. I
squinted into the wind, and as hail stung my cheeks, I
scr eamed into the night fr om the depths of my
misunderstood  soul.
A fe w guys hear d me, popped out of the tr ee line to the
north, and stood tall. Then  another guy emer ged to the east,
and another on the edg e of the south - facing  slope. They
wer e all shivering, wrapped in their measly poncho liners.
None of them wanted to be ther e, but they r ose up and did
their d uty . In spite of one of the most brutal stor ms in R anger
School history, we held a complete perimeter until the
instructors radioed us to  come in fr om the cold. Literally .They p ut up a cir cus tent. W e ﬁled in and huddled up until
the stor m  passed.
The ﬁnal weeks in R ange r School ar e called Florida Phase, a
ten - day  F TX  in which ﬁf ty men navigate the panhandle, G PS
point b y GPS  point, as a single unit. It started wit h a static
line ju mp fr om an air craf t at 1,500 feet into frigid
swamplands near F ort W alton Beach. W e waded and swam
acr oss rivers, set up r ope bridges, and with our hands and
feet sh immied back to the other side. W e couldn’t stay dry,
and the water temperatur e was in the high thirties and low
forties. W e’d  all hear d the story that during the winter of
1994 it got so cold, four would - be  R angers died of
hypother mia during Florida Phase. Being near t he beach,
fr eezing my nuts oﬀ, r em inded me of Hell W eek. Whenever
we stopped, guys wer e n ut to butt and jackhammering, but
as usual, I focused har d and r efused to show any weakness.
This tim e it wasn’t about taking the souls of our instructors.
It w as about giving courag e to the men who wer e struggling.
I’d cr os s the river six times if that’s what it took to  help one
of m y guys tie oﬀ his r ope bridge. I’d walk them step - by - step
thr ough the pr ocess until they could pr ove their va lue to the
R anger  brass.
W e sle pt very little, ate even less, and continually knock ed
oﬀ r e connaissance tasks, hitting waypoints, setting up
bridges and weapons, a nd pr eparing for ambu sh, while
taking tur ns leading a gr oup of ﬁf ty men. Those men wer e
tir ed, hungry, cold, frustrated, and they did not want to be
ther e a nymor e. Most wer e at their ultimate edge, their 100
per cent. I was getting the r e too, but even when it wasn’t my
tur n to lead, I helped out because in those sixty - nine  days of
R anger Scho ol I lear ned that if you want to call yourself a
leader, that’s what it  tak es.A true leader stays e xhausted, abhors ar r ogance, and never
looks down on the weak est link. He ﬁghts for his  men and
leads by e xample. That’s  what it meant to be uncommon
among uncommon. It m eant being one of the best and
helping your men ﬁnd the ir best too . It was a lesson I’d wish
sunk in  a lot deeper, beca use in just a few mor e weeks I’d be
challenged in the leadership department and come up well
short.
R anger School was so demanding, and the standar ds wer e so
high th at onl y ninety - six  men graduated out of a class of 308
candidates, and the majority of them wer e fr om Bravo
platoon. I was awar ded E nlisted Honor Man and r eceived a
100 per cent peer evaluat ion. T o me that meant even mor e,
because my classmates, my fellow knuckle drag gers, had
valued my leadership in harsh conditions, and on e look in
the mir r or r evealed just how harsh those conditions  wer e.Certiﬁcate for being the Enlisted Honor Man at R anger School
I lost ﬁf ty - six  pounds in R anger School. I look ed lik e death.
My cheeks wer e sunk en. M y eyes bugged out. I had  no bicep
muscle lef t. All of us wer e emaciated. Guys had tr ouble
running down  the block. Men who could do forty pull - ups  in
one go now struggled to d o a single one. The Ar my  e xpected
that an d scheduled thr ee days between the end of Florida
Phase and graduation to fatten us up befor e our families ﬂew
in to  celebrate.
As soon as t he ﬁnal F TX was called, we hustled s traight to
chow hall. I piled my tray with doughnuts, fries, and
cheesebur gers, and went looking for the milk machine. A f ter
drinking all those damn chocolate shak es when I was down
and out, my body had become lactose intolera nt, and Ihadn’t touch ed dairy in y ears. But that day I was lik e a little
child, unable to stiﬂe a primor dial year ning for a glass of
milk.
I foun d the milk machine, pulled the lever down and
watched, confused, as it funneled out, chunk y as cottage
cheese. I shrugged and sn iﬀed. It smelled all kinds of wr ong,
but I r ememb er downing that spoiled milk lik e it was a fr esh
glass of sweet tea, courtesy of another hellacious special
for ces school that put us thr ough so much, by the end
anybody who  survived was grateful for their cold glass of
spoiled  milk.
* * *
Most p eople tak e a couple weeks oﬀ to r ecover fr om R anger
School and put some weight back on. Most people do that.
The day of graduation,  on V alentine’s Day, I ﬂew into
Cor onado to meet up with  my second platoon. Once again, I
look ed at that lack of lag time as an opportun ity to be
uncommon. N ot that anybody else was watching, but when it
comes to mindset, it doesn’t matter wher e other people’s
attention lies . I had my own uncommon standar ds  to live up
to .
A t e very stop I’d made in the SEALs, fr om BUD/S to that ﬁrst
platoon to R anger Sch ool, I was known as a har d
motherfuck er, and when the OIC in my second platoon put
me in char ge of PT, I was encouraged because it told me that
once a gain I’d landed with a gr oup of men who wer e driven
to put out an d get better . Inspir ed, I bent my brain to think of
evil shit we could do to get us battle r eady . This ti me we all
knew w e’d d eploy to Iraq, and I made it my mission to help
us bec ome the har dest SEAL platoon in the ﬁght. T hat was a
high bar, set by the original Navy SEAL legend still lodged
lik e an anchor deep in my brain. Our legend suggested wewer e the type of men to swim ﬁve miles on Mo nday, run
twenty miles on T uesday , and climb a 14,000- foot  peak on
W ednesday, and my e xpectations wer e sk y fucking  high.
F or the ﬁrst week, guys rallied at 5 a.m. for a run - swim - run
or a twelve - mile  ruck, followed by a lap thr ough the O -
Course . W e car ried logs over the ber m and hammer ed
hundr eds of push - ups . I had us doing the har d shit, the r eal
shit, the work outs that made us SEALs. Each  day the
work outs wer e har der than the last and over the course of a
week or two, that wor e people down. Every alpha male in
special ops wants to be t he best at everything they do, but
with me leading PT they couldn’t always be the best.
Because I never gave th em a br eak. W e wer e al l br eaking
down and showing weakness. That was the idea,  but they
didn’t want to be challenged lik e that every day . During the
second week, attendance ﬂagged and the OIC and  the Chief
of our platoon took me  aside.
“ L ook, dude,” our OIC said, “this is stupid. What ar e we
doing?”
“W e ar en’t in BUD/S anymor e, Goggins,” said the  Chief .
T o me , this wasn’t about being in BUD/S, this was about
living the SEAL ethos an d ear ning the T rident every day .
These guys wanted to do their own PT, which typically meant
hitting the gym and getting big. They wer en’t inter ested in
being punish ed physically , and deﬁnitely wer en’t inter ested
in being pushed to meet my standar d. Their r eaction
shouldn’t have surprised me, but it sur e as hell dis appointed
me and made me lose all r espect for their  leadership.
I u nde rstood that not everyone wanted to work out lik e an
animal for the r est of the ir car eer, because I didn’t want to
do tha t shit either! But w hat put distance between me and
almost everybody else in that platoon is that I did n’t let mydesir e for comfort rule m e. I was deter mined to go to war
with m yself to ﬁnd mor e because I believed it was  our duty
to maintain a BUD/S mentality and pr ove ourselves every
day . Navy SEALs ar e r eve r ed the world over and ar e thought
to be the h ar dest men that God ever cr eated, but that
conversation made me r ealize that wasn’t always  true.
I ha d just co me fr om R anger School, a place wher e nobody
has any rank at all. Even if a General had classed up, he’d
have b een in the same clothes we all had to wear, that of an
enlisted man on day one of basic fucking training. W e wer e
all ma ggots r ebor n, with no futur e and no past, starting at
zer o . I loved that concept  because it sent a messa ge that no
matter what we’d accomplished in the outside world, as far
as the R angers wer e concer ned we wer en’t shit. And I
claimed that metaphor for myself, because it’s always and
for ever true.  No matter what you or I achieve, in sports,
business, or life, we can’t  be satisﬁed. Life is too dynamic a
game. W e’r e either getting better or we’r e getting worse.
Y es, we need to celebrate our victories. Ther e’s power in
victory that’s transfor mative, but af ter our celeb ration we
should dial it down, dr ea m up new training r egimens, new
goals, and start at zer o the very ne xt day . I wak e up every
day as if I am back in BUD/S, day one, week  one.
Starting at zer o is a min dset that says my r efrigerator is
never full, and it never  will be. W e can alway s become
str onger and mor e agile, mentally and physically . W e can
always become mor e capable and mor e r eliable. Since that’s
the cas e we should never  feel that our work is done. Ther e is
always mor e to  do .
Ar e you an e xperienced scuba diver? Gr eat, shed your gear,
tak e a deep br eath and become a one - hundr ed - foot  fr ee
diver . Ar e you a badass triathlete? Cool, lear n how to r ock
climb. Ar e you enjoyi ng a wildly successfu l car eer?W onderful, l ear n a new language or skill. Get a second
degr ee. Always be willing to embrace ignorance and become
the dumb fuck in the cla ssr oom again, because t hat is the
only w ay to e xpand your body of knowledge and body of
work. It’s the only way to e xpand your  mind.
During week two of my second platoon, my Chief and OIC
showed their car ds. It was devastating to hear that they
didn’t feel that we needed to ear n our status every day . Sur e,
all the guys I  work ed with over the years wer e r elatively har d
guys and highly skilled. They enjoyed the challenges of the
job, the br other hood, and being tr eated lik e superstars. They
all loved being SEALs, but some wer en’t inter ested in
starting at zer o because j ust by qualif ying to br eathe rar e air
they wer e alr eady satisﬁed. Now, that is a very common way
of thin king. Most people  in the world, if they ever push
themselves at all, ar e willing to push themselves only so far .
Once t hey r each a cushy plateau, they chill the fuc k out and
enjoy their r ewar ds, but ther e’s another phrase for that
mentality . It’s called getting sof t, and that I could not  abide.
As f ar as I was concer ned  I had my own r eputation to uphold,
and when the r est of the  platoon opted out of my custom
made hellscape, the chip on my shoulder gr ew even bigger . I
ramped up my work outs  and vowed to put out so har d it
would hurt their fucking feelings. As head of PT, tha t was not
in my job description. I was supposed to inspir e guys to give
mor e. Instead, I saw what I consider ed a glaring weakness
and let them know I wasn’t  impr essed.
In o ne short week, my lea dership r egr essed light years fr om
wher e I was in R anger School. I lost touch with my situational
awar eness (S A) and didn’t r espect the men in m y platoon
enough. As a leader, I was trying to bull my way thr ough,
and they buck ed against that. Nobody gave an inch,
including the  oﬃcers. I su ppose all of us took a path of leastr esistance. I just didn’t n otice it because physic ally I was
going har der than  ever .
And I had on e guy with me. Sledge was a har d mo therfuck er
who gr ew up  in San Ber na r dino, the son of a ﬁr eﬁg hter and a
secr etary, an d, lik e me, he  taught himself to swim in or der to
pass th e swim  test and qu alif y for BUD/S. He was o nly a year
older but was alr eady in  his fourth platoon. He w as also a
heavy drink er, a little overweight, and looking to change his
life. The mor ning af ter th e Chief, the OIC, and I had wor ds,
Sledge show ed up at 5 a.m. r eady to r oll. I’d been ther e
since 4:30 a.m. and had a lather of sweat working  alr eady .
“I li k e what y ou’r e doing with the work outs,” he sa id, “and I
wanna k eep doing  them.”
“ R oger  that.”
F r om t hen on, no matter wher e we wer e stationed, whether
that w as Cor onado, Nila nd, or Iraq, we got af ter it every
single mor ning. W e’d m eet up at 4 a.m. and get to it.
Sometimes t hat meant running up the side of a mountain
befor e hitting the O - Course  a t high speed and car rying logs
up and  over the ber m and down the beach. In BUD/S, usually
six men car ried those logs. W e did it with just the two of us.
On ano ther d ay we r ock ed a pull - up  pyramid, hitting sets of
one, a ll the way up to tw enty, and back down to o ne again.
A f ter every other set we’d climb a r ope forty feet high. One
thousand pull - ups  be for e br eakfast became our new mantra.
A t ﬁrst, Sledge struggled to r ock one set of ten pull - ups .
W ithin months he’d lost thirty - ﬁve  pounds and was hitting
one hundr ed sets of  ten!
In Iraq , it was impossible  to get long runs in, so we lived in
the weight r oom. W e did  hundr eds of deadlif ts and spent
hours o n the hip sled. W e  went way beyond overtraining. W e
didn’t car e about muscle fatigue or br eakdown because af tera certa in point we wer e t raining our minds, not our bodies.
My wo rk outs wer en’t desi gned to mak e us fast runners or to
be the  str ongest men on the mission. I was train ing us to
tak e tortur e so we’d r emain r elax ed in e xtra or dinarily
uncomfortable envir onments. And shit did get uncomfortable
fr om time to  time.
Despite the clear divide within our platoon (Sledg e and me
vs. everyone  else) we o perated well together in  Iraq. Oﬀ
duty, however, ther e was a huge gulf between who the two
of us wer e becoming an d who I thought the m en in my
platoon wer e, and my disappointment showed. I wor e my
shitty attitude ar ound lik e a shr oud, thus ear ning me the
platoon nick name David  “ L eave Me Alone” Goggins, and
never wok e up to r ealize that my disappointment was my
own pr oblem. Not my teammates’ fault.
Platoon dynamics aside, ther e was still a job to do in Iraq
That’s the drawback of becoming uncommon amongst
uncommon. Y ou can push  yourself to a place that is beyond
the cur r ent capability or temporal mindset of the people you
work with, and that’s ok ay . Just know that your supposed
superiority is a ﬁgment of your own ego . So don’t lor d it over
them, becaus e it won’t he lp you advance as a team  or as an
individual in your ﬁeld. I nstead of getting angry that your
colleagues ca n’t k eep up, help pick your colleagues up and
bring them with  you!
W e ar e all ﬁghting the same battle. All of us ar e tor n
between comfort and perfor mance, between settling for
mediocrity or  being willing to suﬀer in or der to be come our
best self, all the damn time. W e mak e those kinds of
decisions a dozen or mor e  times each day . My job as head of
PT w asn’t to demand that  my guys live up to the N avy SEAL
legend  I lov ed, it wa s to help them become the best versi on
of themselves. But I never listened, and I didn’t lead.
Instead, I got angry and s howed up my teammates. F or two
years I played the tough guy and never took a step back with
a c alm mind to addr ess my original er r or . I had countless
opportunities to bridge the gap I’d helped cr eate, but I never
did, and it cost  me.
I di dn’t r ealize any of th at right away, because  af ter my
second plato on, I was or d er ed to fr eefall school, then made
an a ssaults instructor . Both wer e posts scheduled to pr ep me
for Gr een T eam. Assaults was critical because most people
who ge t cut fr om Gr een T e am ar e dismissed for sloppy house
runs. They move too slow when clearing buildings, ar e too
easily e xposed, or ar e amped up and trigger happy and end
up shooting friendly tar gets. T eaching those skills made me
clinical, stealthy, and calm in conﬁned envir onments, and I
e xpected to r eceive my or ders to train with DEVGRU in Dam
Neck, V ir ginia, any day, but they never came. The other twoguys who’d r ock ed the scr eening with me r eceived their
or ders. Mine went  A WOL.
I called leadership at Dam Neck. They told me to scr een
again, and that’s when I knew something was oﬀ. I thought
about the pr ocess I’d bee n thr ough. Did I r eally e xpect to do
better? I smok ed that shit. But then I r emember ed the actual
interview, wh ich felt mor e lik e an inter r ogation with two men
playing good cop, bad cop. They didn’t pr obe my skillset or
Navy knowhow . Eighty - ﬁve  pe r cent of their questio ns had
nothing to do with my a bility to operate whatsoever . The
bulk of that interview was about my  race.
“W e ar e a bunch of good ol’ boys,” one of them said, “and
we ne ed to know how you’r e gonna handle hearing black
jok es, br o .”
Most of their questions w er e a variation on that o ne theme
and thr ough it all, I smiled and thought, How a re you  white
boys gonna feel when I’m the baddest motherfucker in here?
But that’s not what I sa id, and it wasn’t because I was
intimidated or uncomfortable. I was mor e at hom e in that
interview than anywher e I’d been in the military, b ecause for
the ﬁrs t time  in my life it was out in the fucking open. They
wer en’t trying to pr etend that being one of only a handful of
black guys in per haps the most r ever ed military or ganization
in the world didn’t have its own unique set of c hallenges.
One gu y was  challenging me with his aggr essive postur e and
tone, t he other guy k ept it cool, but they wer e both being
r eal. T her e wer e two or th r ee black men in DEVGRU alr eady
and they wer e telling m e that entry into their in ner cir cle
r equir ed my signing oﬀ on certain ter ms and conditions. And
in a sick way , I loved that message and the challenge that
came with  it.
DEVGRU was a har d ass, r enegade cr ew within the SEALs,
and th ey wanted it to stay that way . They didn’ t want tocivilize anybody . They didn’t want to evolve or change, and I
knew wher e I was and what I was getting myself into . This
cr ew was r esponsible fo r the most danger ous, tip of the
spear missions. It was a white man’s underworld, and these
guys needed to know how I’d act if someone start ed to fuck
with me. They needed assurances I could contr ol my
emotions, and once I saw thr ough their language into the
gr eater purpose, I couldn’t be oﬀended by their  act.
“ L ook, I’ve e xperienced ra cism my entir e life,” I r eplied, “and
ther e is nothing any of you fuck ers can say to me that I
haven’t hear d twenty times befor e, but be r eady . Because
I’m coming right the fuck back at you!” A t the t ime, they
seemed to lik e the sound of that. T r ouble is, when you’r e a
black g uy giving it back it usually doesn’t go over  nearly as
well.
I will never know why I d idn’t r eceive my or ders for Gr een
T eam, and it doesn’t matter . W e can’t contr o l all the
variables in our lives.  It’s about what we do with
opportunities r evok ed or pr esented to us that deter mine how
a story ends. Instead of thinking, I crushed the screening
process once , I can do it a gain,  I  decid ed to start at zer o and
scr een for Delta F or ce— the Ar my’s version of DEVGRU,
instead.
Delta Selection is rigor ou s, and I’d always been intrigued by
it due to the  elusive natur e of the gr oup. Unlik e SEALs, you
never hear d about Delta. The scr eening for Delta Selection
included an IQ test, a com plete military r esume including my
qualiﬁcations and war e xperience, and my evaluations. I
pulled all of that together in a few days, knowing that I was
competing against the best guys fr om every military branch
and that only the cr eam w ould be e xtended an invitation. My
Delta o r ders came thr oug h in a matter of weeks. Not longaf ter th at, I landed in the mountains of W est V ir gini a r eady to
compete for a spot among the Ar my’s very best  soldiers.
Strangely, ther e was no yelling or scr eaming in the Delta
void. Ther e was no mu ster and no OICs. The men that
showed up ther e wer e all self - starters  and our or ders wer e
chalk ed on a boar d hanging in the bar racks. F or thr ee days
we we r en’t a llowed to leave the compound. Our focus was
r est and acclimatization, but on day four, PT started up with
the basic scr eening test, which included two minutes of
push - ups , two minutes of sit - ups , and a timed two - mile  run .
They e xpected everyone to meet a minimum standar d, and
those that didn’t wer e sent home. F r om ther e things got
immediately and pr ogr essively mor e diﬃcult. In fact, later
that same night we had o ur ﬁrst r oad mar ch. Lik e e verything
in Delt a, oﬃcially the distance was unknown, but I believe it
was about an eighteen - mile  course fr om start to  ﬁnish.
It w as cold and very dark when all 160 of us took oﬀ,
strapped with ar ound forty - pound  rucksacks. Most guys
started out in a slow mar c h, content to pace themselves and
hik e it out. I took oﬀ hot, and in the ﬁrst quarte r mile lef t
everyone behind. I saw an opportunity to be uncommon and
seized it, and I ﬁnished a bout thirty minutes befor e anybody
else.
Delta Selecti on is the best orienteering course in the world.
F or the ne xt ten days we hammer ed PT in the mor ning and
work ed on advanced land navigation skills into the night.
They ta ught us how to get fr om A to B by r eading the ter rain
instead of r oads and trails on a map. W e lear ned to r ead
ﬁngers and cuts, and tha t if you get high you want to stay
high. W e wer e taught to fo llow water . When you start r eading
the land this way, your m ap comes alive, and for the ﬁrst
time in my lif e I became g r eat at orienteering. W e lear ned to
judge d istance and how to draw our own topographic maps.A t ﬁrst  we wer e assigned an instructor to tail thr ough the
wildlands, and those instructors hauled ass. F or the  ne xt few
weeks we wer e on our own. T echnically, we wer e still
practicing, b ut we wer e also being graded and w atched to
mak e sur e we wer e moving cr oss - country  instead of taking
r oads.
It all culminated with an e xtended ﬁnal e xam in the  ﬁeld that
lasted seven days and nights, if we even made it that far .
This w asn’t a team eﬀort. Each of us was on our o wn to use
our map and compass to navigate fr om one waypo int to the
ne xt. T her e w as a Humvee at every stop and the cadr es (our
instructors an d evaluators ) ther e noted our time an d gave us
the ne xt set of coor dinates. Each day was its own unique
challenge, an d we never knew how many points w e’d have
to n avigate befor e the t est was done. Plus, ther e was an
unknown time limit that only the cadr es wer e privy to . A t the
ﬁnish l ine we  wer en’t told if we passed or failed. Instead we
wer e dir ecte d to one of two cover ed Humvees. The good
truck took you to the ne xt  camp, the bad truck motor ed back
to base, wher e you would  have to pack your shit and head
home. Most of the time I didn’t know if I made it for sur e until
the truck  stopped.
By da y ﬁve I was one  of r oughly thirty guys still in
consideration for Delta F or ce. Ther e wer e only thr ee days lef t
and I was r ocking every test, coming in at least ninety -
minutes  befor e dr op - dead  time. The ﬁnal test would be a
forty - mile  ball - kick er  of a land navigation, and I was looking
forwar d to that, but ﬁrst I had work to do . I splashe d thr ough
washes, huﬀ ed up sloped woodlands, and ramb led along
ridgelines, point - to - point  until the unthink able happened. I
got los t. I was on the wr o ng ridge. I double check ed my map
and co mpass and look ed acr oss a valley to the cor r ect one,
due  south.R oger  that!
F or the ﬁrst time, the clock became a factor . I didn’t know
the dr op - dead  time, but k new I was cutting it close, so I
sprinted dow n a steep ravine but lost my footing. My lef t foot
jammed between two bo ulders, I r olled over my ankle and
felt it pop. T he pain was immediate. I check ed my watch,
gritted my teeth, and la ced my boot tight as quickly as I
could, then hobbled up a steep hillside to the cor r ect  ridge.
On the  ﬁnal str etch to the  ﬁnish, my ankle blew up so bad I
had to  untie my boot to r elieve the pain. I moved slow,
convinced I would be sen t home. I was wr ong. M y Humvee
unloaded us  at the second to last base camp of Delta
Selection, wher e I iced my ankle all night knowing that
thanks to my injury, the ne xt day’s land navigation test was
lik ely b eyond my capabil ity . But I didn’t quit. I showed up,
fought to stay in the mix, but missed my time on one of the
early c heckpoints and tha t was that. I didn’t hang my head,
because inju ries happen.  I’d given it everything I had and
when you handle busines s lik e that, your eﬀort w ill not go
unnoticed.
Delta cadr es ar e lik e r obots. Thr oughout Selection they didn’t
show a ny per sonality, but  as I was getting r eady to leave the
compound, o ne of the oﬃcers in char ge called me into his
oﬃce.
“ Goggins,” h e said, e xtending his hand, “ you ar e a stud! W e
want you to heal up, com e back, and try again. W e believe
you will be a gr eat addition to Delta F or ce  someday .”
But when? I came to fr om my second heart sur gery in a
billowing cloud of anesthesia. I look ed over my right shoulder
to an IV drip and followed the ﬂow to my veins. I was wir ed
to the medical mind. Beeping heart monitors r ecor ded data
to tell a stor y in a langu age beyond my compr ehension. Ifonly I wer e ﬂ uent, maybe I’d know if my heart was ﬁnally
whole, if ther e would ever be a “someday .” I placed  my hand
over my heart, closed my eyes and listened for  clues.
A f ter le aving Delta, I went back to the SEAL T eam s and was
assigned to land warfar e as an instructor instead of a war rior .
A t ﬁrs t my morale ﬂagged. Men who lack ed my skills,
commitment, and athletic ability wer e in the ﬁeld in two
countries an d I was mo or ed in no - man ’ s - land , wondering
how it had all gone so haywir e so quickly . It felt lik e I’d hit a
glass ceiling, but had it always been ther e or did I slide it into
place myself? The truth was somewher e in  between.
I r ealized fr om living in  Brazil, Indiana, that pr ejudice is
everywher e. Ther e is a piece of it in every person and each
and every or ganization, a nd if you ar e the only  in any given
situation, it’s  on you to decide how you’r e going to handle it
because you  can’t mak e it go away . F or years, I used it to
fuel me because ther e’s a lot of power in being the only . It
for ces you to juice your own r esour ces and to believe in
yourself in the face of unf air scrutiny . It incr eases the degr ee
of diﬃculty, which mak es every success that much sweeter .
That’s why I continually  put myself in situations wher e I
knew I would encounter it. I fed oﬀ being the only  o ne in a
r oom. I br ought the war to people and wat ched my
e x cellence e xplode small minds. I didn’t sit bac k and cry
about being the only . I took action, said go fuck yourself, and
used all the pr ejudice I felt as dynamite to blow up those
walls.
But that kind of raw mate rial will only get you so far in life. I
was so confr ontational I cr eated needless enemies along the
way, and I b elieve that’s what limited my access to the top
SEAL T eams.  W ith my car eer at a cr ossr oads, I d idn’t have
time to dwell on those m istak es. I had to ﬁnd high er gr ound
and tu r n the negative I’d cr eated into another positive. Ididn’t just accept land wa rfar e duty, I was the best  instructor
I co uld possibly be, and on my own time I cr eated new
opportunities for myself by launching my ultra quest, which
r evived my stalled car eer . I was right back on track until I
lear ned I’d been bor n with a br ok en  heart.
Y et ther e was a positive side to that too . T uck ed into my post -
op  hosp ital bed, I look ed to be fading in and out of
consciousness, as conversations between doctors, nurses,
my wife, and mother bled  into one another lik e wh ite noise.
They h ad no clue that I was wide awak e the whole time,
listening to my wounded heart beat, and smiling inside.
Knowing I ﬁnally had deﬁnitive, scientiﬁc pr oof that I was as
uncommon as any motherfuck er who has ever  lived.C H A L L E N G E  # 9
This on e’s for the unusual motherfuck ers in this world. A lot
of people think that on ce they r each a certain level of
status, r espect, or success, that they’ve made it in life. I’m
her e t o tell you that you always have to ﬁnd mor e.
Gr eatness is not something that if you meet it once it stays
with yo u for e ver . That shit evaporates lik e a ﬂash of oil in a
hot  pan.
If you truly want to become uncommon amongst the
uncommon, it will r equir e sustaining gr eatness for a long
period of time. It r equir es staying in constant pursuit and
putting out unending eﬀort. This may sound appealing but
will r equir e everything y ou have to give and then some.
Believe me, this is not fo r everyone because it will demand
singular focus and may upset the balance in your  life.
That’s what it tak es to b ecome a true overachiever, and if
you ar e alr eady sur r ounded by people who ar e at t he top of
their game, what ar e you going to do diﬀer ently to stand
out? It’s easy to stand ou t amongst everyday peop le and be
a big ﬁsh in a small pon d. It is a much mor e diﬃcult task
when you ar e a wolf sur r ounded by  wolves.
This means not only getting into Wharton Business School,
but being rank ed #1 in your class. It means not just
graduating B UD/S, but becoming Enlisted Hono r Man in
Ar my R anger School then going out and ﬁnishing  Badwater .
T or ch the complacency you feel gathering ar ound you, your
cowork ers, a nd teammates in that rar e air . Continue to put
obstacles in fr ont of yourself, because that’s wher e you’llﬁnd the friction that will help you gr ow even str onger . Befor e
you know it, you will stand  alone.
#canthurtme #uncommonamongstuncommon.C H A P T E R  T E N
1 0 .  THE EMPOWERMENT OF
F AIL URE
O N  S EP TEMBER  27, 2012, I STOOD  IN  A  MAKESHIF T  G YM  ON  THE  SECOND
ﬂoor o f 30 R ock efeller Center pr epar ed to br eak the world
r ecor d for pull-ups in a tw enty -four -hour period. That was the
plan, anyway . Savannah Guthrie was ther e, along with an
oﬃcial fr om the Guinnes s Book of W orld R ecor ds and Matt
Lauer (yeah, that fucking guy). Again, I was gunning to raise
money—a lot of money this time—for the Special Operations
W ar rior F oun dation, but I also wanted that r ecor d. T o get it I
had to perfor m under The T oday Show  spotlight.
The number in my head was 4,020 pull - ups . Sounds
super human, right? Did t o me too, until I dissected it and
r ealized if I could knock o ut six pull - ups  on the minute, every
minute, for twenty - four  h ours , I’d shatter it. That’s r oughly
ten sec onds of eﬀort, and ﬁf ty seconds of r est, each minute.
It wouldn’t be easy, but I consider ed it doable given  the work
I’d put  in. Over the past ﬁve to six months, I’d r o ck ed over
40,000 pull - ups  and was stok ed to be o n the pr ecipice of
another huge  challenge. A f ter all the ups and downs since
my second heart sur gery, I needed  this.
The go od new s was the s ur gery work ed. F or the ﬁrst time in
my life I had a fully functioning heart muscle, and I wasn’t in
a rush  to run or ride. I was patient with my r ecovery . TheNavy wouldn ’t clear me to operate anyway, and in or der to
stay in  the SEALs I had to accept a non - deployable , non -
combat  job . A dmiral W inters k ept me in r ecruiting for two
mor e y ears, and I r emained on the r oad, shar ed my story
with willing ears, and work ed to win hearts and minds. But all
I r eally  wante d to do was what I was trained to do, and that’s
ﬁght! I tried to salve that wound with trips to the gun range,
but shooting tar gets only made me feel  worse.
In 2 011, af ter r ecruiting fo r four - plus  years and spending two
and a half years on the disabled list due to my hea rt issues, I
was ﬁnally medically cl ear ed to operate again . A dmiral
W inters oﬀer ed to send me anywher e I wanted to go . He
knew my sacriﬁces and my dr eams, and I told him I had
unﬁnished business with Delta. He signed my papers, and
af ter a ﬁve - year  wait, my someday had  ar rived.A war ded the Meritorious Service Medal for my work in r ecruitingChosen as Sailor of the Quarter, January to Mar ch 2010
Once again, I dr opped int o Appalachia for Delta Selection. In
2006, af ter I smok ed the eighteen - mile  r o ad ruck on  our ﬁrst
r eal day of work, I hear d some well - intentioned  blowback
fr om so me of the other guys who wer e tapped into the rumor
mill. In Delta Selection ev erything is a secr et. Y es, ther e ar e
clear t asks and training but nobody tells you how long the
tasks ar e or will be (even  the eighteen - mile  ruck was a best
estimate bas ed on my ow n navigation), and only the cadr es
know how they evaluate their candidates. A ccor ding to the
rumor mill, they use that ﬁrst ruck as a baseline to calculatehow long each navigation  task should tak e. Meaning if you
go har d you’ll eat away at your own mar gin for er r or . This
time, I  had that intel going in, and I could have play ed it safe
and tak en my time, but I wasn’t about to go out among
those g r eat m en and give a half - assed  e ﬀort.  I went out even
har der so I could mak e sur e they saw my very best, and I
br ok e my own course r ecor d (accor ding to that r eliable
rumor mill) by nine  minutes.
R ather than hear it fr om m e, I r eached out to one of the guys
who was in D elta Selection with me, and below i s his ﬁrst -
hand  account of how that ruck went  down:
Befor e I can talk about the r oad mar ch, I have to give a
little bit of conte xt in the days leading up to it. Showing
up to Selection you have no idea what to e xpect,
everyone hears stories but you do not have a complete
grasp of what you ar e about to go thr ough…I r emember
ar riving at an airport waiting for a bus and everyone was
hanging out bullshitting. F or many people it is a r eunion
of friends that you haven’t seen in years. This is also
wher e you start sizing everyone up. I r emember a
majority of the people talking or r elaxing, ther e was one
person who was sitting on his bag, looking intense. That
person I would later ﬁnd out was David Goggins, you
could tell right fr om the start he would be one of the guys
at the end. Being a runner, I r ecognized him, but didn’t
r eally put it all together until af ter the ﬁrst few  days.
Ther e ar e several events that you know you have to do
just to start the course; one of those is the r oad mar ch.
W ithout getting into speciﬁc distances, I knew it was
going to be fairly far but was comfortable with running a
majority of it. Coming into Selection, I had been in Special
F or ces for a majority of my car eer and it was rar e when
someone ﬁnished befor e me in a r oad mar ch. I wascomfortable with a ruck on my back. When we started it
was a little cold and very dark, and as we took oﬀ I was
wher e I was most comfortable, out fr ont. W ithin the ﬁrst
quarter mile a guy blew by me, I thought to myself, “No
way he could k eep that pace.” But I could see the light on
his headlamp continue to pull away; I ﬁgur ed I would see
him in a few miles af ter the course crushed  him.
This particular r oad mar ch course has a r eputation of
being brutal; ther e was one hill that as I was going up I
could almost r each out in fr ont of me and touch the
gr ound, it was that steep. A t this point, ther e was only
one guy in fr ont of me and I saw footprints that wer e
twice as long as my stride length. I was in awe, my e xact
thought was, “This is the craziest shit I have seen; that
dude ran up this hill.” Thr oughout the ne xt couple of
hours, I was e xpecting to come ar ound a cor ner and ﬁnd
him laid up on the side of the r oad, but that never
happened. Once ﬁnished, I was laying out my gear and I
saw David hanging out. He had been done for quite a
while. Though Selection is an individual event, he was the
ﬁrst to give a high ﬁve and say, “Nice  work.”
—T, in an email dated 06/25/2018
That perfor m ance lef t an impr ession beyond the guys in my
Selection class. I hear d r ecently fr om Hawk, another SEAL,
that some Ar my guys he work ed with on deployment wer e
still tal king a bout that ruck, almost lik e it is an urban legend.
F r om ther e I continued to smash thr ough Delta Selection at
or nea r the top of the class. My land navigation skills wer e
better than they’d ever been, but that doesn’t mean it was
easy . R oads wer e oﬀ limit s, ther e was no ﬂat gr ound, and for
days we bushwhack ed up  and down steep slopes, in below -
fr eezing  tempe ratur es, taking wa ypoints, r eading maps, an d
the countles s peaks, ridges, and draws that all look ed thesame. W e moved thr ough thick brush and deep snow banks,
splashed thr ough icy c r eeks, and slalomed th e winter
sk eletons of towering tr ees. It was painful, challenging, and
fucking beau tiful, and I w as smoking it, mashing every test
they could  conjur e.
On the second to last day of Delta Selection, I hit my ﬁrst
four points as fast as u sual. Most days ther e wer e ﬁve
waypoints to  hit in total, so when I got my ﬁf th I was beyond
conﬁdent. In my mind, I was the black Daniel Boone. I
plotted my point and moseyed down another steep grade.
One way to navigate for e ign ter rain is to track po wer lines,
and I could see that one of those lines in the dis tance led
dir ectly to my ﬁf th, and ﬁ nal point. I hustled down country,
track ed the line, tur ned my conscious mind oﬀ, and started
dr eaming ahead. I knew I was going to r ock the ﬁnal e xam—
that forty - mile  land navigation I didn’t even get to attempt
last tim e because I busted my ankle two days befor e. I
consider ed my graduation a for egone conclusion, and af ter
that I’d  be running and gunning in an elite unit again. As I
visualized it, it became al l the mor e r eal, and my imagination
took me far away fr om the Appalachian  Mountains.
The th ing ab out following  the power supply is yo u’d better
mak e damn sur e you’r e on the right line! A ccor d ing to my
training, I was supposed to be constantly checking my map,
so if I made a misstep I could r e - adjust  a nd head in the right
dir ection without losing too much time, but I was so
over conﬁdent I for got to do that, and I didn’t chart backstops
either . By the time I wok e fr om fantasy land, I was way oﬀ
course and almost out of  bounds!
I w ent into panic mode , found my location on the map,
humped it to the right power line, sprinted to the top of the
mountain and  k ept running all the way to my ﬁf th p oint. I still
had ninety minutes until dr op - dead  t im e b ut whe n I got closeto the ne xt Humvee I saw another guy heading back towar d
me!
“Wher e you headed,” I ask ed as I jogged  over .
“I’m oﬀ to my sixth point,” he  said.
“Shit, ther e’s not ﬁve points  today?!”
“Nah, ther e’s six today, br other .”
I c heck ed my watch. I had a little over forty minutes befor e
they c alled time. I r eached the Humvee, took down the
coor dinates for checkpoint six and studied the map. Thanks
to my fuck up, I had two  clear options. I could pl ay by the
rules a nd mis s dr op - dead  time or I could br eak the rules, use
the r oads at my disposal,  and give myself a chance . The one
thing o n my side was that in special operations they prize a
thinking shoo ter, a soldier willing to do what it tak e s to meet
an obj ective. All I could d o was hope they’d have mer cy on
me. I plotted  the best po ssible r oute and took the fuck oﬀ. I
skirted the woods, used the r oads, and whenever I hear d a
truck r umbling in the near distance, I took cover . A  half hour
later, at the cr est of yet another mountain, I could see the
sixth p oint, o ur ﬁnish line. A ccor ding to my watch, I had ﬁve
minutes  lef t.
I ﬂew downhill, sprinting all out, and made dr op - dead  by one
minute. As I caught my br eath, our cr ew was divided and
loaded into the cover ed beds of two separate Humvees. A t
ﬁrst gl ance, my gr oup of guys look ed pr etty squar ed away,
but giv en when and wher e I r eceived my sixth point, every
cadr e in the place had to  know I’d skirted pr otocol. I didn’t
know what to think. W as I still in or assed  out?
A t Del ta Sele ction, one way to be sur e you’r e ou t is if you
feel speed bumps af ter a  day’s work. Speed bumps meanyou’r e back at the base, and you’r e heading home early .
That d ay, when we felt th e ﬁrst one jar us out of our hopes
and dr eams, some guys started cursing, others ha d tears in
their eyes. I just shook my  head.
“ Goggins, w hat the fuck ar e you doing her e?” One guy
ask ed. He was shock ed to see me sitting alongside him, but I
was r esigned to my r eality because I’d been daydr eaming
about gradua ting Delta training and being a part of the for ce
when I hadn’t even ﬁnished  Selection!
“I d idn’t do what they told me to do,” I said. “I fucking
deserve to go  home.”
“ Bullshit! Y ou ar e one of the best guys out her e. They’r e
making a huge  mistak e.”
I appr eciated his outrage. I e xpected to mak e it too, but I
couldn’t be upset by their decision. Delta brass wer en’t
looking for men who could  pass a class with a C, B+, or even
an A - eﬀ ort. They only accep ted A+ students, and if you
fuck ed up and deliver ed a perfor mance that was below your
capability the y sent you packing. Shit, if you daydr eam for a
split second on the battleﬁeld, that could mean your life and
the life of one of your br others. I understood  that.
“No . It was my mistak e,” I said. “I got this far by staying
focused and delivering my best, and I’m going home
because I lost  focus.”
* * *
It was time to go back to being a SEAL. F or the ne xt two
years I  based in Honolulu as part of a clandestine transport
unit called SD V, for SEAL Delivery V ehicles. Operation R ed
W ings is the best known SD V mission, and you only hear d
about it because it was such big news. Most SD V workhappens in the shadows, and well out of sight. I ﬁt in well
over ther e, and it was gr eat to be back operating again. I
lived on F or d Island, with a view of P earl Harbor right out my
living r oom window . K ate and I had split up, so n ow I was
r eally living that Spartan life, and still waking up at 5 a.m. to
run into work. I had two r outes, an eight - miler  an d a ten -
miler , b ut no mat ter which I took my body didn’t r eact too
well. A f ter only a few mi les, I’d feel intense neck pain and
dizzy s pells. Ther e wer e several times during my runs that I
would have to sit down due to  vertigo .
F or yea rs I’d harbor ed a suspicion that we all had a limit on
the miles we could run b efor e a full - body  br eakdown, and I
wonder ed if I was closing in on mine. My body had never felt
so tight. I ha d a knot on  the base of my sk ull that I ﬁrst
noticed af ter graduating BUD/S. A decade later it had
doubled in size. I had knots above my hip ﬂe x ors too . I went
to the doctor to get everything check ed out, but they wer en’t
even tumors, much les s malignant. When th e doctors
clear ed me of mortal danger, I r ealized I’d have to  live with
them and try to for get about long - distance  ru nning for a
while.
When an activity or e x e r cise that you’ve always r elied on
gets tak en away fr om you , lik e running was for me, it’s easy
to get stuck in a mental rut and stop doing any e x er cise at
all, but I didn ’t have a quitter’s mentality . I gravitated towar d
the pull - up  bar and r eplicated the work outs I used to do with
Sledge. It was an e x er cis e that allowed me to pu sh myself
and didn’t mak e me dizzy because I could tak e a br eak
between sets. A f ter a while I Googled ar ound to se e if ther e
was a pull - up  r ecor d within r each. That’s when I r ead about
Stephen Hyland’s many pull - up  r ecor ds, including the
twenty - four - hour  r ecor d of 4,020.A t t he time I was known as an ultra runner, and I didn’t want
to be known for just one thing. Who does? Nobody thought of
me as an all - ar ound  athlete, and this r ecor d  could change
that dy namic. How many people ar e capable of running 100,
150, e ven 200 miles and also knocking out over 4,000 pull -
ups  in a day? I called th e Special Operations W ar rior
F oundation a nd ask ed if I could help raise a bit mor e money .
They w er e th rilled, and ne xt thing I knew, a contact of mine
used h er networking skil ls to book me on the damn T oday
Show .
T o pr epar e for the attempt I did 400 pull - ups  a day during the
week, which took me about seventy minutes. On Satur day I
did 1,500 pull - ups , in sets of ﬁve to ten r eps over thr ee
hours, and on Sunday I dialed it back to 750. All that work
str engthened my lats, triceps, biceps, and back, pr epar ed my
shoulder and elbow joints to tak e e xtr eme punishment,
helped me develop a pow erful gorilla - type  grip, and built up
my lac tic aci d tolerance so my muscles could still function
long af ter they wer e overwork ed. As game day appr oached, I
shortened r ecovery and started doing ﬁve pull - ups  every
thirty second s for two hours. A f terwar d my ar ms fell to my
side, limp as overstr etched rubber  bands.
On the eve of my r ecor d attempt, my mom and uncle ﬂew
into Ne w Y ork  City to help  cr ew me, and we wer e all systems
go until the SEALs nearly killed my T oday Show  appearance
at the last minute. No Easy Day , a ﬁrst - hand  account of the
Osama Bin Laden raid, had just come out. It was written by
one of  the operators in the DEVGRU unit that go t it done,
and Naval Special W arfar e brass wer e not happy . Special
Operators ar e not supposed to shar e details of the work we
do in the ﬁeld with the g eneral public, and lots of people in
the T eams r esented that book. I was given a dir ec t or der to
pull out of th e appearance, which didn’t mak e an y sense. I
wasn’t going  on camera to talk about operations, and Iwasn’t on a mission to self - pr omote . I wan ted to  raise one
million dollars for families of the fallen, and The T oday Show
was the biggest mor ning show on  television.
I’d served in the military  for nearly twenty years by that
point, without a single infraction on my r ecor d, and for the
pr evious four  years the Navy had used me as th eir poster
boy . Th ey put me on bill boar ds, I was interviewed on CNN,
and I’d  jumpe d out of an airplane on NB C. They pla ced me in
dozens of magazine and newspaper stories, whi ch helped
their r e cruitment mission. Now they wer e trying to  stiﬂe me
for no good r eason. Hell, if anybody knew the r egulations of
what I could and could not say it was me. In the nick of time,
the Navy’s legal department clear ed me to  pr oceed.
Billboar d during my r ecruiting daysMy inte rview was brief . I told a CliﬀsNotes version of my life
story and mentioned I’d  be on a liquid diet, drinking a
carbohydrate - loaded  sp orts drink as my only  nutrition until
the r ecor d was  br ok en.
“What should  we cook for you tomor r ow once it’s all over?”
Savannah Guthrie r eplied. I laughed and played along,
agr eeable as  hell, but do n’t get it twisted, I was way out of
my com fort zone. I was a bout to go to war with myself, but I
didn’t look lik e it or act lik e it. As the clock woun d down I
took my shirt oﬀ and was wearing only a pair of lig htweight,
black running shorts and running  shoes.
“W ow, it’s lik e looking at  myself in a mir r or,” La uer jok ed,
gesturing towar d  me.
“This segment just got even mor e inter esting,” said
Savannah. “ A ll right David, best of luck to you. W e will be
watching.”
Someone hit play on Going the Distance , the Rocky  theme
song, a nd I stepped to the pull - up  b ar . It was p ainted matte
black, wrapped with white tape, and stenciled with the
phrase, SHOW NO WEAKNES S in w hite lettering. I got the last
wor d in as I strapped on my gray  gloves.
“ Please donate to specialops.or g ,” I said. “W e’r e trying to
raise a million  dollars.”
“ Alright, ar e you r eady?” Lauer ask ed. “Thr ee…tw o…one…
David, go!”
W ith th at, th e clock started and I r ock ed a set of eight pull -
ups . Th e rules laid down b y the Guinness Book of W orld
R ecor ds wer e clear . I had to start each pull - up  f r om a dead
hang w ith ar ms fully e xtended, and my chin had to e x ceed
the  bar .“So it begins,” Savannah  said.
I sm iled for t he camera and look ed r elax ed, but even those
ﬁrst pull - ups  d idn’t  feel right. P art of it was situational. I was
a lone  ﬁsh in a glass bo x aquarium that attracted  sunshine
and r eﬂected a bank of h ot show lights. The other half was
technical. F r o m the very ﬁrst pull - up  I noti ced th at the bar
had a lot mor e give than  I was used to . I didn’t have my
usual power and anticipa ted a long fucking day . A t ﬁrst, I
block ed that shit out. Had to . A looser bar just meant a
str onger eﬀort and gave me another opportunity to be
uncommon.
Thr oughout t he day people passed by on the str e et below,
waved, and cheer ed. I w aved back, k ept to my plan, and
r ock ed six pull - ups  on the minute, every damn minute, but it
wasn’t easy because of that rick ety bar . My for ce was getting
dissipated, and af ter hundr eds of pull - ups , dissipation took
its toll. Each subsequent pull - up  r e quir ed a monumental
eﬀort, a str onger grip, an d at the 1,500 mark my  for ear ms
hurt lik e hell. My massage therapist rubbed them down
between sets , but they bu lged with lactic acid which seeped
into every muscle in my upper  body .
A f ter mor e than six long hours, and with 2,000 pull - ups  in the
bank, I took my ﬁrst ten - minute  br eak. I was well ahead of
my twenty - four - hour  pace, and the sun angled lower on the
horizon, which r educed the mer cury in the r oom to
manageable. It was late enough that the whole studio was
shut d own. It was just me, a few friends, a massage
therapist, and my mother . T oday Show  cameras wer e set up
and r o lling to  clock me an d mak e sur e I k ept to r egulations. I
had mor e than 2,000 pull - ups  still to go, and for the ﬁrst time
that day, doubt carved out a home in my  brain.
I didn’t vocalize my negativity, and I tried to r eset my mind
for the second half push,  but the truth was my whole planhad go ne to hell. My carbohydrate drink wasn’t giving me
the po wer I needed, and I didn’t have a Plan B, so  I or der ed
and downed a cheesebur ger . It felt good to have some r eal
food. Meanw hile, my team tried to stabilize the bar by tying
it to  the pipes in the raf ters, but instead of r ech ar ging my
system lik e I’d hoped, the long br eak had an adverse  eﬀect.
During ﬁrst pull-up r ecor d attemptMy body was shutting d own, while my mind swirled with
panic b ecause I’d made a pledge and stak ed my name on a
quest to raise money and br eak a r ecor d, and I alr eady knew
that th er e was no way on  this earth I was gonna be able to
get it done. It took me ﬁve hours to do another 500 pull - ups
—that’s an average of under two pull - ups  per minute. I was
ver ging on total muscle f ailur e af ter doing only 1,000 mor e
pull - ups  t han I would r ock in thr ee hours at the gym on  a
typical Satur day with no ill eﬀects. How was that  possible?
I tr ied to bu ll my way thr ough, but tension and lactic acid
had overwhelmed my system and my upper body was a
lump of dough. I had never hit muscle failur e befor e in my
life. I’d run on br ok en leg s in BUD/S, run nearly a hundr ed
miles on br ok en feet, and accomplished dozens of physical
feats with a hole in my heart. But late at night, on the
second ﬂoor of the NB C tower, I pulled the plug.  A f ter my
2,500th pull - up , I could bar ely lif t my ha nds high enough to
grip the bar, let alone clea r it with my chin, and just lik e that,
it w as over . Ther e would be no celebratory br eakfast with
Savannah and Matt. Ther e would be no celebration at all. I
failed, and I’d failed in fr ont of millions of  people.
So d id I hang my head in shame and misery? F uck no! T o me
a failur e is just a stepping stone to futur e success. The ne xt
mor ning, my  phone was blowing up so I lef t it in  my hotel
r oom and went for a ru n in Central P ark. I nee ded zer o
distractions and time en ough to go back thr ough what I’d
done well and wher e I’d fallen short. In the military, af ter
every r eal - world  mission or ﬁeld e x er cise, we ﬁll out A f ter
A ction R eports (A ARs), which serve as live autopsi es. W e do
them no matter the ou tcome, and if you’r e analyzing a
failur e lik e I was, the A AR is absolutely crucial. Because when
you’r e headed into uncharted ter ritory ther e ar e no  books to
study, no Y ouT ube instruc tional videos to watch. All I had to
r ead wer e my mistak es, and I consider ed all  variables.F irst of all, I should never have gone on that show . My
motivation was solid. It was a good idea to try to incr ease
awar eness and raise money for the foundation, a nd while I
r equir ed e xpo sur e to raise the amount I’d hoped, b y thinking
of m oney ﬁrst (always a bad idea) I wasn’t focus ed on the
task at hand. T o br eak this r ecor d, I needed an optimal
envir onment, and that r ealization blasted me lik e a surprise
attack. I didn’t r espect th e r ecor d enough going in. I thought
I co uld have br ok en it on a rusty bar bolted to the back of a
pick - up  t ru ck with lo ose shocks, so even though I tested t he
bar twice befor e game day, it never bother ed me enough to
mak e a change, and my l ack of focus and attention to detail
cost m e a shot at immortality . Ther e wer e also way too many
bubbly look y - loos  b uzzin g in and out of the  r oom, asking for
pictur es between sets. This was the beginning of the selﬁe
era, and that sicknes s most deﬁnitely inv aded my
motherfucking safe  space.
Obviously, m y br eak was too long. I ﬁgur ed massage would
counteract th e swelling and lactic acid build - up , bu t I was
wr ong about that too, and I should have tak en mor e salt
tablets to pr event cramping. Befor e my attemp t, haters
found m e online and pr edicted my failur e, but I ignor ed them
and didn’t fully absorb the har d truths couched in their
negativity . I thought, as long as I trained har d, the r ecor d
would be mine, and as a r esult, I wasn’t as well - pr epar ed  as I
should have  been.
Y ou can’t pr epar e for un known factors, but if you have a
better pr e - game  focus,  you will lik ely only have to deal with
one or two rather than te n. In New Y ork, too man y bubbled
up, and unknown factor s usually blaze a wak e of doubt.
A f terwar d, I was eye to eye with my haters and
acknowledged that my mar gin for er r or was small.  I weighed
210 pounds, much heavier than anyone else who had evertried to  br eak that r ecor d, and my pr obability of failur e was
high.
I didn’t touch a pull - up  bar for two weeks, but once back in
Honolulu I hammer ed set s at my home gym and noticed the
diﬀer ence in the bar right way . Still, I had to r esist the
temptation to blame everything on that loose bar because
odds wer e that a ﬁr mer one wouldn’t translate into an e xtra
1,521 pull - ups . I r esear che d gymnast chalk, gloves, and
taping systems. I sampled and e xperimented. This time I
wanted a fan set below the bar to cool me down between
sets, and I s witched up my nutrition. Instead of running oﬀ
pur e carbs I added in som e pr otein and bananas to pr event
cramping. When it cam e time to choose a location to
attempt the r ecor d, I knew I needed to get back to who I am
at my cor e. That meant losing the glitz and setting up shop
in a  dungeon. And on a trip to Nashville, I found just the
place, a Cr ossﬁt gym a m ile fr om my mother’s house, owned
by a for mer marine named Nandor  T amask a.
A f ter emailin g a couple of times, I ran over t o Cr ossﬁt
Br entwood Hills to meet him. It was set in a strip mall, a few
doors down fr om a T ar get, and ther e was nothing fancy
about the place. It had black mat ﬂoors, buck ets of chalk,
racks of ir on, and lots of har d motherfuck ers doing work.
When I walk ed in, the ﬁrst thing I did was grab the pull - up
bar an d shak e it. It was bolted into the gr ound ju st lik e I’d
hoped. Even a little sway in the bar would r equ ir e me to
adjust my grip mid - set , and when your goal is 4, 021 pull - ups ,
all minuscule movements accumulate into a r e servoir of
wasted ener gy, which tak es a  toll.
“This is e xactly what I need,” I said, gripping the  bar .
“Y eah,” Nandor said. “Th ey have to be stur dy to double as
our squat  racks.”In addition to its str ength and stability, it was the right
height. I didn’t want a sh ort bar, because bending your legs
can cause cramping in the hamstrings. I needed it high
enough that I could grab it when standing on my  toes.
I c ould tell right away that Nandor was a perfect co -
conspirator  f or this mission. He had been an enlisted man,
got into Cr ossﬁt, and mo ved to Nashville fr om A tlanta with
his wife and family to op en his ﬁrst gym. Not many people
ar e willing to open their doors and let a stranger tak e over
their gym, but Nandor was down with the W ar rior F oundation
cause.
My second attempt was scheduled for November, and for
ﬁve straight weeks I did  500-1,300 pull - ups  a day at my
home gym in Hawaii. During my last island session, I did
2,000 pull - ups  in ﬁve  hours, then caugh t a ﬂight to Nashville,
ar riving six days befor e my  attempt.
Nandor rallied members o f his gym to act as witnesses and
my su pport cr ew . He took car e of the playlist, sour ced the
chalk, and set up a br eak  r oom in back in case I needed it.
He also put out a pr ess r elease. I trained at his g ym in the
run - up  t o game da y, and a local news channel came by to
ﬁle a r eport.  The local n ewspaper did a story too . It was
small scale, but Nashville was gr owing curious, especially the
Cr ossﬁt junk ies. Several showed up to absorb the scene. I
spok e with Nandor r ecently, and I lik ed how he put  it.
“ P eople have been running for decades, and running long
distances, bu t 4,000 pull - ups , t he human body isn’t designed
to d o t hat. So  to get a chance to witness somethin g lik e that
was pr etty  neat.”
I r este d the full day befo r e the attempt and when I showed
up to the gy m I felt str o ng and pr epar ed for the mineﬁeld
ahead. Nandor and my mom collaborated to have everythingdialed in. Ther e was a sleek digital timer on the wall which
also track ed my count, plus they had two battery - power ed
wall clo cks running as back ups. Ther e was a Guinness Book
of W orld R ecor ds banner hanging over the bar, an d a video
cr ew becaus e every r ep had to be r ecor ded for potential
r eview . My tape was right. My gloves perfect. The bar was
bolted solid, and when I started out, my perfor mance was
e xplosive.
The numbers  r emained the same. I was gunning for six pull -
ups  e very  minute, on the m inute, and during the ﬁrst ten
sets I r ose up  chest high. Then I r emember ed my game plan
to minimize needless movement and wasted ener gy . On my
initial attempt I felt pr essur e to get my chin well over the
bar, bu t whil e all that e xt ra space made for a goo d show, it
did no t and would not help me get the damn r ecor d. This
time I told myself to bar ely clear the bar with my chin, and
not to use m y ar ms and hands for anything other than pull -
ups . I nstead of r eaching dow n for my water bottle lik e  I had
in N ew Y ork, I set it on a stack of wooden bo x es  (the kind
used fo r bo x jumps), so a ll I had to do was tur n an d suck my
nutrition thr ough a straw . The ﬁrst sip trigger ed me to dial
back my pull - up  motion and fr om then on, I r emained
disciplined a s I piled up numbers. I was on my game and
conﬁdent as hell. I wasn ’t thinking of just 4,020 pull - ups . I
wanted to go the full twenty - four  hours. If I did that, 5,000
was possible, or even 6,000!
I r emained hyper vigilant, scanning for any physical issues
that co uld cr op up and d erail the attempt. All was smooth
until, af ter almost four ho urs and 1,300 pull - ups , my hands
started to blister . In bet ween sets my mom hit me with
Second Skin so I could s tay on top of the cuts. This was a
new pr oblem  for me, and I r emember ed all the doubting
comments I’d r ead on social media prior to my attempt. My
ar ms wer e too long, they said. I weighed too much . My for mwasn’t ideal,  I put too much pr essur e on my h ands. I’d
disr egar ded that last comment because during my ﬁrst
attempt I didn’t have palm issues, but in the mi dst of my
second I r ealized it was because the ﬁrst bar had  so much
give. This time I had mor e  stability and power, but over time
that har d - ass  bar did  damage.
Still, I labor ed on and af ter 1,700 pull - ups  my for ear ms
started aching, and when  I bent my ar ms, my biceps pinched
too . I r emem ber ed those sensations fr om my ﬁrst go ’r ound.
It w as the be ginning of cramps, so between sets  I downed
salt tablets and ate two b ananas, and that took car e of my
muscular discomfort. My palms just k ept getting  worse.
A hundr ed and ﬁf ty pull - ups  later I could feel them splitting
down the middle beneath  my gloves. I knew I should stop
and try  to ﬁx the pr oblem, but I also knew that mig ht trigger
my body to stiﬀen up and shut down. I was ﬁghting two ﬁr es
at o nce and didn’t know wher e to strik e ﬁrst. I opted to stay
on the minute by minute pace, and in between e xperimented
with diﬀer en t solutions. I wor e two pairs of glo ves, then
thr ee. I r esorted to my o ld friend, duct tape. Didn’t help. I
couldn’t wra p the bar in  pads because that was against
Guinness ru les. All I could do was try anything and
everything to stay in the  ﬁght.
T en ho urs into the attempt, I hit a wall. I was dow n to thr ee
pull - ups  a  minute on the minute. The pain was e x cruciati ng
and I needed some r elief . I took my right glove oﬀ. Layers of
skin came oﬀ with it. My p alm look ed lik e raw hambur ger . My
mom called a doctor friend, R egina, who lived nearby and
the tw o of us went into th e back r oom to wait for her and try
to salv age my r ecor d attempt. When R egina show ed up she
evaluated th e situation, pulled out a syringe, loaded it with
local anesthetic  and dipped the needle towar d the open
wound on my right  hand.My hand during the second pull-up r ecor d attempt
She look ed over . My heart pounded, sweat saturated every
inch of  my skin. I could feel my muscles cooling down and
stiﬀening up,  but I nodded, tur ned away, and she sunk that
needle in deep. It hurt so fucking bad, but I held my primal
scr eam inside. Show no weakness  r emained my motto, but
that didn’t mean I felt str ong. My mom pulled oﬀ my lef t
glove, anticipating the second shot, but R egina was busy
e xamining th e swelling in my biceps and the bulgin g spasms
in my  for ear ms.
“Y ou look lik e you’r e in r habdomyolysis, David,” she said.
“Y ou sh ouldn’t continue. I t’s danger ous.” I had no idea what
the fuck she was talking about, so she br ok e it  down.
Ther e’s a phenomenon that happens when one muscle gr oup
is wor k ed way too har d for way too long. The muscles
become starved of glu cose and br eak down , leaking
myoglobin, a ﬁbr ous pr otein that stor es o xygen in the
muscle, into the bloodstr e am. When that happens, it’s up to
the kidneys to ﬁlter all those pr oteins out and if they become
overwhelmed, they shut down. “ P eople can die fr om
r habdo,” she  said.
My hands thr obbed with agony . My muscles wer e locking up,
and th e stak es couldn’t be higher . Any rational person wouldhave thr own  in the tow el, but I could hear Going the
Distance  boo ming fr om the speak e rs, and knew that this wa s
my 14th r ound, Cut me, Mick , moment.
F uck rational ity . I held up my lef t palm and had R egina sink
her ne edle in. W aves of pain washed thr ough me as a
bumper cr op  of doubt ﬂower ed in my mind. She wrapped
both p alms in layers of g auze and medical tape and ﬁtted
me wit h a fr esh pair of g loves. Then I stalk ed back out onto
the gym ﬂoor and got back to work. I was at 2,90 0, and as
long as I r em ained in the ﬁght, I still believed any thing was
possible.
I did sets of twos and thr ees on the minute for two hours, but
it fe lt l ik e I was gripping a r ed hot, melting r od, wh ich meant
I was down to using my ﬁngertips to grip the bar . F irst I used
four ﬁngers, then thr ee. I was able to gut out one hundr ed
mor e pull - ups , then one hundr ed mor e. Hours tick ed by . I
cr ept closer but with my  body in r habdo, br eakdown was
imminent. I did several sets of pull - ups  with my wrists
dangling over the bar . It sounds impossible, but I managed
until the numbing agen ts stopped working. T hen even
bending my ﬁngers felt lik e I was stabbing mys elf in the
hand with a sharp  knife.
A f ter eclipsing 3,200 pull - ups , I wor k ed o ut the math and
r ealized if I could do 800 sets of one, it would tak e thirteen
hours and change to br eak the r ecor d and I would just beat
the clock. I lasted forty - ﬁve  minutes. The pain was too much
and th e vibe in the r oom went fr om optimistic to  somber . I
was st ill tryin g to show as  little weakness as I coul d, but the
volunteers could see me messing with my gloves and grip,
and knew something was drastically wr ong. When I  went into
the back to r egr oup a se cond time I hear d a colle ctive sigh
that sounded lik e  doom.R egina and my mother unwrapped the tape on my hands,
and I could f eel my ﬂesh peeling lik e a banana. Both palms
wer e ﬁlleted open down to the der mis, which is wher e our
nerves lie. A chilles had his heel, and when it cam e to pull -
ups , m y gif t, and  my undoing, wer e my hands. The do ubters
wer e right. I wasn’t one o f those lightweight, graceful pull - up
guys. I  was powerful, and the power came fr om my  grip. But
now m y hand better r esembled a physiology m annequin
than something  human.
Emotionally, I was waste d. Not just because of my sheer
physical e xha ustion or because I couldn’t get the r ecor d for
myself, but because so many people had come out to help.
I’d tak en over Nandor’s gym and felt lik e I’d disappointed
everyone. W ithout a wor d , my mother and I slipped out the
back d oor lik e we wer e escaping a crime scene, a nd as she
dr ove to the hospital, I couldn’t stop thinking, I’m better than
this !
While Nando r and his team br ok e down the clocks, untied
the banners,  swept up c halk, and peeled bloody  tape oﬀ
their pull - up  ba r, my mo m and I slumped into chairs in the
ER waiting r oom. I was holding what was lef t of my glove. It
look ed lik e it was lif ted fr om the OJ Simpson crime scene, lik e
it h ad been m arinated in blood. She eyeballed me and shook
her  head.
“W ell,” she said, “I know one  thing…”
A f ter a long pause I tur ned to face  her .
“What’s  that?”
“Y ou’r e gonna do this  again.”
She r ead my damn min d. I was alr eady doing my live
autopsy and would run th r ough a complete A AR on paper assoon a s my bloody hands would allow . I knew ther e was
tr easur e in this wr eck age and leverage to be gained
somewher e. I just had to piece it together lik e a puzzle. And
the fact that she r ealized that without my saying s o ﬁr ed me
up.
A lo t of us sur r ound ourse lves with people who speak to our
desir e for comfort. Who would rather tr eat the pain of our
wounds and pr event furth er injury than help us callous over
them and try again. W e  need to sur r ound ourselves with
people who will tell us what we need to hear, not what we
want t o hear , but at the same time not mak e us feel we’r e
up aga inst th e impossible . My mother was my bi ggest fan.
Whenever I failed in life she was always asking me when and
wher e I would go af ter it again. She never said, Well, maybe
it isn’t meant to  be.
Most w ars ar e won or lost  in our own heads, and when we’r e
in a fo xhole we usually ar en’t alone, and we need to be
conﬁdent in the quality o f the heart, mind, and d ialogue of
the person hunk er ed dow n with us. Because at some point
we will need some empowering wor ds to k eep us focused
and de adly . In that hospital, in my own personal fo xhole, I
was sw imming in doubt. I fell 800 pull - ups  short and I knew
what 800 pull - ups  felt lik e. That’s a long fucking day! But
ther e was nobody else I’ d rather have been in th at fo xhole
with.
“ Don’t wor ry ,” she said. “ I’ll start calling those witnesses up
as soon as we get  home.”
“ R oger that,” I said. “T ell them I’ll be back on that bar in two
months.”
* * *In life, ther e is no gif t as overlook ed or inevitable as failur e.
I’ve had quite a few and have lear ned to r elish them,
because if you do the for ensics you’ll ﬁnd clues about wher e
to mak e adjustments and how to eventually accomplish your
task. I’m not talking abo ut a mental list either . A f ter the
second attem pt, I wr ote e verything out long - hand , but didn’t
start with the obvious issu e, my grip. Initially, I brainstor med
everything th at went well, because in every failur e a lot of
good things will have happened, and we must acknowledge
them.
The best tak eaway fr om the Nashville attempt was Nandor’s
place. His dungeon of a gy m was the perfect envir onment for
me. Y eah, I’m on social m edia, and in the spotlight fr om time
to time , but I am not a Hollywood person. I get my str ength
fr om a  very dark place, a nd Nandor’s gym wasn’t a phony -
ass , ha ppy factory . It was d ark, sweaty, painful, and  r eal. I
called him the very ne xt day and ask ed if I could c ome back
to train and m ak e another run at the r ecor d. I’d tak en a lot of
his tim e and ener gy and l ef t behind a mess, so I had no idea
how he’d  r espond.
“Y eah, mothe rfuck er,” he said. “ L et’s go!” It mean t a lot to
have his support  again.
Another posi tive was how I handled my second m eltdown. I
was oﬀ  the mat and on th e comeback trail befor e I even saw
the ER doc. That’s wher e you want to be. Y ou can’t let a
simple failur e derail your mission, or let it wor m so far up
your ass it tak es over your brain and sabota ges your
r elationships with people who ar e close to you. Everyone
fails so metimes and life isn’t supposed to be fair, much less
bend to your every  whim.
L uck is a capricious bitch. It won’t always go you r way, so
you can’t get trapped in this idea that just because you’ve
imagined a possibility for yourself that you somehow deserveit. Y our entitled mind is dead weight. Cut it loose. Don’t focus
on what you think you d eserve. T ak e aim on what you ar e
willing to ear n! I never bl amed anyone for my failur es, and I
didn’t hang my head in  Nashville. I stayed humble and
sidestepped my entitled mind because I knew damn well I
hadn’t ear ned my r ecor d. The scor eboar d does not lie, and I
didn’t delude myself otherwise. Believe it or not, most
people pr efe r delusion. They blame others or bad luck or
chaotic cir cumstance. I didn’t, which was  positive.
I l isted  most of the equipment we used on the positive side
of t he A AR, as well. The tape and chalk work ed, and even
though the bar tor e me the fuck up, it also got me 700
additional pull - ups , so I was headed in the right dir ection.
Another pos itive was the support of Nandor’s Cr ossﬁt
community . I t felt gr eat to be sur r ounded by such intense,
r espectful pe ople, but this time I’d need to cut the number of
volunteers in half . I wanted as little buzz in tha t r oom as
possible.
A f ter li sting o ut all the pl usses, it was time to kick  the tir es
on my mindset, and if you’r e doing your post - faceplant  due
diligence, you should do that too . That means checking
yourself on how and what you wer e thinking during the
pr eparation and e x ecution phases of your fa ilur e. My
commitment to pr eparation and deter mination in the ﬁght
ar e always ther e. They didn’t waver, but my b elief was
shakier than I car ed to admit, and as I pr epar ed for my thir d
go ’r ound it was imperative to move beyond  doubt.
That w asn’t easy because  af ter my second failur e in as many
attempts, the  doubters wer e everywher e online. T he r ecor d
holder, Stephen Hyland, was light and spidery str ong with
thick, muscu lar palms. He was the perfect build for the pull -
up  r ecor d, and everyone w as telling me I was just too big,
my for m was  too brutal, and that I should stop trying to gofor it befor e I hurt mysel f even worse. They pointed to the
scor eboar d th at doesn’t lie. I was still over 800 pull - ups  away
fr om the r ecor d. That’s m or e than I gained between my ﬁrst
and se cond attempts. F r om the beginning some of  them had
pr edicted my  hands would give out, and when that truth
r evealed itself in Nashville it pr esented a big mental hur dle.
P art of me wonder ed if those motherfuck ers wer e right. If I
was trying to achieve the  impossible.
Then I thought of an English middle - distance  runner fr om
back in the day named R o ger Bannister . When Bannister was
trying to br eak the four - minute  mile in the 1950s, e xperts
told him it couldn’t be d one, but that didn’t stop him. He
failed again and again, bu t he persever ed, and when he ran
his historic mile in 3:59.4 on May 6, 1954, he d idn’t just
br eak a r ecor d, he br ok e open the ﬂoodgates simply by
pr oving it possible. Six weeks later, his r ecor d was eclipsed,
and by now over 1,000 r unners have done what was once
thought to be beyond human  capability .
W e ar e  all guilty of allowing so - called  e xperts, or just people
who ha ve mor e e xperien ce in a given ﬁeld than we do, to
cap our potential. One of the r easons we love sports is
because we also love watching those glass ceilings get
shatter ed. If I was going  to be the ne xt athlete to smash
popular per ception, I’d need to stop listening to doubt,
whether it str eamed in fr om the outside or bubbled up fr om
within, and the best way  to do that was to decide that the
pull - up  r e cor d  was alr eady mine. I didn’t know when it would
oﬃcially become mine. It  might be in two months or twenty
years, but once I decided it belonged to me and decoupled it
fr om th e cale ndar, I was ﬁlled with conﬁdence and r elieved
of any and all pr essur e because my task morphed fr om
trying to achieve the impossible into working towar d an
inevitability . But to get ther e, I’d have to ﬁnd the tactical
advantage I’d been  missing.A tacti cal r ev iew is the ﬁn al and most vital piece o f any live
autopsy or A AR . And while  I had impr oved tactically fr om the
ﬁrst attempt—working on a mor e stable bar and minimizing
wasted ener gy—I still fell 800 r eps short, so we needed to
delve deeper  into the nu mbers. Six pull - ups  p er minute on
the mi nute h ad failed me twice. Y es, it placed me  on a fast
track t o 4,02 0, but I neve r got ther e. This time, I decided to
start slower to go further .  I also knew fr om e xperie nce that I
would hit some sort of wall af ter ten hours and  that my
r esponse couldn’t be a longer br eak. The ten - hour  mark
smack ed me in my face twice and both times I stopped for
ﬁve minutes or longer, which led to ultimate failur e pr etty
quickly . I needed to stay true to my strategy and  limit any
long br eaks to four minutes  max.
Now, about that pull - up  b ar . Y eah, it would pr oba bly tear me
up aga in, so I needed to ﬁnd a work ar ound. A ccor d ing to the
rules, I wouldn’t be all owed to switch up the distance
between my  hands mid - attempt . Th e width would have to
r emain the same fr om the ﬁrst pull - up . Th e only thi ng I could
change would be how I w as going to pr otect my hands. In
the run - up  to my thir d attempt, I e xperimented with all
diﬀer ent types of gloves. I also got clearance to use custom
foam pads to pr otect my palms. I r emember ed seeing a
couple SEAL buddies use slices of foam mattr esses  to pr otect
their hands when they we r e lif ting heavy weights, and called
on a mattr ess company to custom design for m - ﬁtting  pads
for my  hands. Guinness appr oved the equipment, and at 10
a.m. on January 19, 201 3, two months af ter failing for the
second time,  I was back on the bar at Cr ossﬁt Br entwood
Hills.
I s tarted slow and easy with ﬁve pull - ups  on the minute. I
didn’t strap my foam pads with tape. I just held them in
place a r ound the bar, and they seemed to work well. W ithin
an hou r the foam had for med ar ound my hands, insulatingthem fr om molten - ir on  hell. Or so I fucking hoped. A t ar ound
the two - hour , 600 r ep mark, I ask ed Nandor to play Going
the Distance  on a lo op. I felt something click inside and went
full  cybor g.
I fo und a r hythm on the bar and between sets I sat on a
weight bench and star ed at the chalk - dusted  ﬂ oor . My point
of view  nar r owed into tunnel vision as I pr epar ed my mind
for the  hell that was to come. When the ﬁrst blister opened
on my palm I knew shit was about to get r eal. But  this time,
thanks to my failur es and for ensics, I was  r eady .
That doesn’t mean I was having any fun. I wasn’t. I was over
it. I didn’t want to do pull - ups  anymor e, but achieving goals
or over comin g obstacles doesn’t have to be fun. Seeds burst
fr om the inside out in a self - destructive  ritual of new life.
Does t hat sound lik e fucking fun? Lik e it feels good ? I wasn’t
in that  gym to get happy  or do what I wanted to b e doing. I
was ther e to tur n myself inside out if that’s what it took to
blast thr ough any and all mental, emotional, and physical
bar riers.
A f ter twelve hours, I ﬁnally hit 3,000 pull - ups , a major
checkpoint fo r me, and fe lt lik e I’d run headﬁrst int o a wall. I
was e x asperated, in agony, and my hands wer e starting to
come a part a gain. I was s till a long way fr om the r ecor d, and
I fe lt a ll the eyeballs in the r oom upon me. W ith th em came
the crushing weight of failur e and humiliation. Suddenly, I
was back in the cage dur ing my thir d Hell W eek, taping my
shins and ankles befor e mustering up with a new BUD/S
class who’d hear d it was my last  chance.
It ta k es gr eat str ength to  be vulnerable enough to put your
ass on the line, in public, and work towar d a dr eam that feels
lik e it’s  slipping away . W e all have eyeballs on us. Our family
and friends ar e watching , and even if you’r e sur r ounded by
positive people, they will have ideas about who  you ar e,what y ou’r e good at, and how you should focus your ener gy .
That shit is ju st human natur e, and if you try to br eak out of
their b o x you’ll get some unsolicited advice that has a way of
smothering your aspirations if you let it. Of ten o ur people
don’t mean any har m. No body who car es about us actually
wants us to get hurt. They want us to be safe, comfortable,
and happy, and not to hav e to star e at the ﬂoor in a  dungeon
sif ting thr ough shar ds of our br ok en dr eams. T oo bad. Ther e’s
a lo t o f poten tial in those moments of pain. And if you ﬁgur e
out how to p iece that pictur e back together, you’ll ﬁnd a hell
of a lot of power ther e  too!
I k e pt my b r eak to just four minutes, as planned. L ong
enough to stuﬀ my hands, and those foam pads, i nto a pair
of p added gloves. But wh en I got back on the bar I felt slow
and weak. Nandor, his wif e, and the other volunteers saw my
struggle, but  they lef t m e the fuck alone to put in my ear
buds, channel R ock y Balboa, and k eep grinding one r ep at a
time. I went fr om four pull - ups  o n the minute to thr ee, and
found my cybor g trance  again. I went ugly, I got dark. I
imagined my pain was the cr eation of a mad scientist named
Stephen Hyland, the evil genius who was in temporary
possession of my r ecor d and my soul. It was him! That
motherfuck er was torturing me fr om acr oss the glo be, and it
was up  to me and only m e to k eep piling up num bers and
steamr oll towar d him, if I wanted to tak e his motherfucking
soul!
T o be clear, I wasn’t angry with Hyland—I don’t even know
him! I went ther e to ﬁnd the edge I needed to k ee p going. I
got personal with him in my head, not out of over conﬁdence
or envy, but to dr own out my own doubt. Life is a head
game. This was just the latest angle I used to win a game
within that game. I had to ﬁnd an edge somewhe r e, and if
you ﬁnd it in the person standing in your way, that’s  potent.As the hours tick ed pa st midnight I started closing the
distance between us, bu t the pull - ups  wer en’t coming fast
and th ey wer en’t coming easy . I was tir ed mentally and
physically, deep into r habdo, and I was down to thr ee pull -
ups  a minute. When I hit 3,80 0 pull - ups  I  felt lik e I could see
the mountain top. I also knew it was possible to go fr om
being able to do thr ee pull - ups  to  no pull - ups  in a ﬂash.
Ther e ar e stories of people at Badwater who r eached mile
129 an d couldn’t ﬁnish a 135- mile  race! Y ou never know
when you’ll r each your 100 per cent and hit the point of total
muscle fatig ue. I k ept waiting for that moment to come,
when I couldn’t pick my a r ms up anymor e. Doubt stalk ed me
lik e a shadow . I tried my best to contr ol it or silence it, yet it
k ept r eappearing, following me, pushing  me.
A f ter sevente en hours of pain, ar ound 3 a.m. on Ja nuary 20,
2013, I did m y 4,020th and 4,021st pull - up , and the r ecor d
was m ine. Everyone in the gym cheer ed, but  I stayed
composed. A f ter two mor e sets and 4,030 total pull - ups , I
took my headphones out, star ed into the camera and said, “I
track ed you down, Stephen  Hyland!”
In one day, I’d lif ted th e equivalent of 846,030 pounds,
nearly thr ee times the weight of the Space Shuttle! Cheers
spr ead to laughter as I pu lled oﬀ my gloves and disappear ed
into the back r oom, but much to everyone’s surprise, I was
not in the mood to  celebrate.
Does that shock you too? Y ou know that my r efrigerator is
never full, and it never wi ll be because I live a mission - driven
life, always on the hunt fo r the ne xt challenge. That mindset
is the r eason  I br ok e that r ecor d, ﬁnished Badwater, became
a SEAL , r ock ed R anger School, and on down the list. In my
mind I’m that racehorse always chasing a car r ot I’ll never
catch, for ever trying to pr ove myself to myself . And whenyou liv e that way and attain a goal, success feels anti -
climactic .
Unlik e my initial shot at t he r ecor d, my success bar ely made
a ri pple in the  news cycle. Which was just ﬁne. I wa sn’t doing
it fo r a dulation. I raised some money, and I lear ned  all I could
fr om that pull - up  b ar . A f ter lo gging mor e than 67,000 pull -
ups  in nine months, it was time to put them in my Coo kie Jar
and move on. Because life is one long motherfucking
imaginary game that has no scor eboar d, no r efer ee, and isn’t
over until we’r e dead and  buried.
And all I’d ev er wanted fr om it was to become suc cessful in
my own eyes. That didn’t mean wealth or celebrity , a garage
full of hot ca rs, or a har em of beautiful women tra iling af ter
me. It meant becoming the har dest motherfuck er who ever
lived. S ur e, I  stack ed up s ome failur es along the way, but in
my mind the r ecor d pr ove d that I was close. Only the game
wasn’t over, and being h ar d came with the r equir ement to
drain every dr op of abili ty fr om my mind, body, and soul
befor e the whistle  blew .
I would  r emain in constant pursuit. I wouldn’t leave anything
on the table. I wanted to ear n my ﬁnal r esting place. That’s
how I thought back then, anyway . Because I had no  clue how
close to the end I alr eady  was.C H A L L E N G E  # 1 0
Think about your most r ecent and your most heart -
wr enching  failur es. Br eak out that jour nal one last time. L og
oﬀ the digital version and write them out long - hand . I want
you to feel this pr ocess b ecause you ar e about to ﬁle your
own, belated A f ter A ction  R eports.
F irst oﬀ , write out all the good things, everything that went
well, fr om your failur es. Be detailed and gener ous with
yourself . A lot of good thi ngs will have happened. It’s rar ely
all bad. Then note how you handled your failur e. Did it aﬀect
your life and your r elationships? How  so?
How di d you think thr oughout the pr eparation for and during
the e x ecution stage of your failur e? Y ou have to know how
you w er e thinking at each step because it’s all about
mindset, and that’s wher e most people fall  short.
Now go back thr ough and mak e a list of things you can ﬁx.
This is n’t time to be sof t  or gener ous. Be brutally honest,
write t hem all out. Study them. Then look at your calendar
and schedule another at tempt as soon as possible. If the
failur e happened in childhood, and you can’t r ecr eate the
Little L eague all - star  game you chok ed in, I still want you to
write that r eport because  you’ll lik ely be able to  use that
infor mation to achieve any goal going  forwar d.
As you pr epar e, k eep that A AR handy, consult your
A ccountability Mir r or, and mak e all necessary adju stments.
When it comes time to e x ecute, k eep everything we’ve
lear ned about the power of a calloused mind, the Cookie Jar,
and Th e 40% R ule in the for efr ont of your mind. Contr ol yourmindset. Dom inate your thought pr ocess. This life is all a
fucking mind game. R ealize that. Own  it!
And if you fa il again, so th e fuck be it. T ak e the pain. R epeat
these steps and k eep ﬁghting. That’s what it’s all about.
Shar e your stories fr om p r eparation, training, and e x ecution
on social media with the hashtags #canthurtme
#empower mentoﬀailur e.C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
1 1 .  WHA T IF?
B EFORE  THE  R A CE  EVEN  KICKED  OFF  I KNEW  I W AS  FUCKED . I N  2014, THE
National P ark Service wouldn’t appr ove the traditional
Badwater course, so Chris K ostman r edr ew the map. Instead
of starting in Death V alle y National P ark and running forty -
two mi les thr ough the hottest desert on the planet, it would
launch further upcountry at the base of a twenty -two -mile
climb. That wasn’t my pr o blem. It was the fact that  I toed the
line eleven pounds over  my usual race weight, and had
gained ten of those pou nds in the pr evious seven days. I
wasn’t a fat ass. T o the average eye I look ed ﬁt, but
Badwater wa sn’t an average race. T o run and ﬁnish str ong,
my condition  needed to be tip top, and I was fa r fr om it.
Whatever was happening to me came as a shock, because
af ter tw o years of substandar d running, I thought I’d gotten
my powers  back.
The pr evious January I’d won a one - hundr ed - kilometer  glacial
trail race called F r ozen O tter . It wasn’t as har d as  the Hurt
100 b ut it was close. Set in W isconsin, just outside
Milwauk ee, t he course laid out lik e a lopsided ﬁgur e eight,
with the start - ﬁnish  at the center . W e passed it between the
two loops, which enabled  us to stock up on food and other
necessary su pplies fr om our cars, and stuﬀ them into our
packs with our emer gency supplies. The weather can tur n
evil out ther e, and race or ganizers compiled a list ofnecessities w e wer e r equir ed to have on us at all tim es so we
wouldn’t die of dehydration, hypother mia, or  e xposur e.
The ﬁrst lap was the lar ge r loop of the two and when we set
oﬀ the temperatur e was sitting at zer o degr ees F ahr enheit.
Those trails wer e never plowed. In some places, snow piled
into drif ts. In others the trails seemed purposefully glazed
with slick ice. Which pr es ented a pr oblem because I wasn’t
wearing boots or trail shoes lik e most of my competitors. I
laced u p my  standar d running shoes, and tuck ed them into
some cheap ass crampons, which theor etically wer e
supposed to grip the ice and k eep me upright. W e ll, the ice
won that war and my crampons snapped oﬀ in the  ﬁrst hour .
Nevertheless, I was leadin g the race and br eaking trail in an
average of six to twelve inches of snow . In some places the
drif ts w er e piled much higher . My feet wer e cold and wet
fr om the starting gun, an d within two hours they felt fr ozen
thr ough, esp ecially my toes. My top half wasn’t faring much
better . When you sweat in below - fr eezing  temperatur e, salt
on your body chafes the s kin. My underar ms and chest wer e
cracking rasp ber ry r ed. I was cover ed in rashes, my toes hurt
with every step, but none of that r egister ed too high on my
pain scale, because I was running  fr ee.
F or the ﬁrst time since m y second heart sur gery,  my body
was beginning to put itself back together . I was getting 100
per cent of my o xygen supply lik e everyone else, my
endurance and str ength wer e ne xt - level , and though the trail
was a slippery mess, my technique was dialed - in  t oo . I was
way out fr ont and stopped at my car for a sandwich befor e
the last twenty - two - mile  loo p. My to es thr obbed  with evil
pain. I suspected they we r e fr ostbitten, which mea nt I was in
danger of losing some of them, but I didn’t want to tak e oﬀ
my shoes and look. Once again, doubt and fear wer e popping
in my brain, r eminding me that only a handful of people had
ever ﬁnished the F r ozen Otter, and that no lead was safe inthat ki nd of cold. W eather, mor e than any other variable, can
br eak a  motherfuck er down quick. But I didn’t listen to any of
that. I cr eate d a new dia logue and told myself to ﬁnish the
race str ong and wor ry ab out amputated toes at the hospital
af ter I was cr owned  champion.
I ran back onto the course. A blast of sun had melted some
of t he snow earlier in the day, but the cold wind ic ed up the
trail nicely . As I ran, I ﬂash ed to my ﬁrst year at Hurt 100 and
the gr e at K a rl Meltzer . Back then, I was a plodde r . I hit the
turf wi th my heel ﬁrst, and peeling the muddy tra il with the
entir e surface ar ea of my foot incr eased my odds of slipping
and fa lling. K arl didn’t run lik e that. He moved lik e a goat,
bouncing on  his toes and running along the edges of the
trail. As soon as his toes hit the gr ound he ﬁr ed his legs into
the air . That’s why he look ed lik e he was ﬂoating. By design,
he bar ely touched the gr ound, while his head and cor e
r emained sta ble and engaged. F r om that momen t onwar d,
his movemen ts wer e per manently etched in my brain lik e a
cave paintin g. I visualized them all the time and put his
techniques into practice during training  runs.
They say it tak es sixty - six  days to build a habit. F or me it
tak es a hell of a lot long er than that, but I even tually get
ther e, and during all th ose years of ultra training and
competition I was work ing on my craf t. A true runner
analyzes their for m. W e didn’t lear n how to do t hat in the
SEALs, but being ar ound so many ultra runners for years, I
was able to absorb and pr actice skills that seemed unnatural
at ﬁ rst. A t F r o zen Otter, my main focus was to hit t he gr ound
sof t; to  touch it just eno ugh to e xplode. During my thir d
BUD/S class and then my ﬁrst platoon, when I was
consider ed o ne of the better runners, my head bounced all
over the place. My weight wasn’t balanced and when my foot
hit the  gr oun d all my weig ht would be supported by that one
leg, which led to some awkwar d falls on slipper y ter rain.Thr ough trial and er r or, and thousands of hours of training, I
lear ned to maintain  balance.
A t F r ozen Otter it all came together . W ith speed an d grace, I
navigated ste ep, slippery trails. I k ept my head ﬂat and still,
my mo tion quiet as possible, and my steps silent by running
on the fr ont of my feet. W hen I pick ed up speed, it was as if
I’d disappear ed into a white wind, elevated into a meditative
state. I  becam e K arl Meltzer . Now it was me who look ed to be
levitating over an impossible trail, and I ﬁnished the race in
sixteen hours, smashing the course r ecor d and winning the
F r ozen Otter title without losing any  toes.
T oes af ter F r ozen Otter
T wo years earlier I was st rick en with dizzy spells during easy
six - mile  runs. In 2013 , I was for ce d to walk over one - hundr edmiles of Badwater, and ﬁnished in seventeenth place. I’d
been o n a downslide and thought my days of contention for
titles w er e long past over . A f ter F r ozen Otter, I was tempted
to believe I’d made it all the way back and then some, and
that my best ultra years wer e actually ahead of me. I took
that ener gy into my pr eparations for Badwater  2014.
I was living in Chicago at the time, working as an instructor
in BUD/S pr ep, a school that pr epar ed candidate s to deal
with the harsh r eality they would face in BUD/S. A f ter mor e
than twenty years, I was in my ﬁnal year of military service,
and by being placed in a position to dr op wisdo m on the
would - bes  and wanna - bes , it felt lik e I’d come full cir cle. As
usual I would run ten miles to work and back, and squeeze in
another eight miles dur ing lunch when I could. On the
week ends I’d  do at least one thirty - ﬁve - to forty - mile  run. It
all added up to a succession of 130- mile  weeks and I was
feeling str ong. As spring bloomed I added a heat training
component by slipping o n four or ﬁve layers of sweats, a
beanie, and a Gor e - T e x  jac k et befor e hitting th e str eets.
When I’d show up at work , my fellow SEAL instructors would
watch, amazed, as I peeled oﬀ my wet clothes and stuﬀed
them into black trash bags that together weighed nearly
ﬁf teen  pounds.
I s tarte d my taper four w eeks out, and went fr om 130- mile
weeks to an eighty - mile  week, then down to sixty, forty, and
twenty . T apering is supposed to generate an abundance of
ener gy as you eat and r est, enabling the body to  r epair all
the damage done and get you primed for competition.
Instead, I’d never felt worse. I wasn’t hungry and couldn’t
sleep at all. Some people said my body was starved of
calories. Oth ers suggeste d I might be low on sodium. My
doctor meas ur ed my thyr oid and it was a little oﬀ, but the
r eadings wer en’t so bad to e xplain how shitty I felt. P er haps
the e xplanation was simple. That I was over - trained .T wo weeks befor e the rac e I consider ed pulling out. I wor ried
it was my heart again bec ause on easy runs I felt a sur ge of
adr enaline that I couldn’t  vent. Even a mellow pace sent my
pulse racing into ar r hythmia. T en days befor e th e race, I
landed in V egas. I’d scheduled ﬁve runs but couldn’t get past
the thr ee - mile  mark on any of them. I wasn’t eating that
much b ut the  weight k ept piling on. It was all water . I sought
out another doctor wh o conﬁr med ther e was  nothing
physically wr ong with me and when I hear d that, I was not
about to be a  pussy .
During the opening miles and initial climb of Badw ater 2014,
my heart rate ran high, but part of that was the altitude, and
twenty - two  miles later I made it to the top in sixth or seventh
place. Surpri sed and pr oud, I thought, let’s see if I can go
downhill. I’ve never enjoyed the brutality of runnin g down a
steep incline  because it shr eds the quads, but I als o thought
it would allow me to r eset and calm my br eath. My body
r efused. I couldn’t catch m y br eath at all. I hit the ﬂ at section
at the bottom, slowed my pace, and began to walk. My
competitors passed me by as my thighs twitched
uncontr ollably . My muscle spasms wer e so bad, my quads
look ed lik e ther e was an alien rattling ar ound inside  them.
And I still didn’t stop! I walk ed for four full miles befor e
seeking shelter in a L one P ine motel r oom wher e the
Badwater medical team h ad set up shop. They check ed me
out and saw that my blood pr essur e was a bit low but easily
cor r ected. They couldn’t ﬁnd a single metric that could
e xplain how fuck ed I  felt.
I ate some solid food, r ested and decided to try one mor e
time. Ther e was a ﬂat section leaving L one P ine and I
thought if I c ould knock that out per haps I’d catch  a second
wind, b ut six or seven miles later my sails wer e still empty,
and I’d given all I had. M y muscles tr embled and  twitched,my hea rt jum ped up and down the chart. I look ed over at my
pacer and said, “That’s it, man. I’m  done.”
My support vehicle pulled up behind us and I climbed inside.
A few minutes later I was laying on that same motel bed,
with m y tail between my legs. I’d lasted just ﬁf ty miles, but
any humiliat ion that came with quitting—not so mething I
was used to—was dr owne d out by an instinct that something
was wa y the  fuck oﬀ. It wasn’t my fear talking or my desir e
for comfort. This time, I was certain that if I didn’t stop trying
to br ea k thr ough this bar rier, I wouldn’t mak e it out of the
Sier ras  alive.
W e lef t L one P ine for Las V egas the ne xt night, and for two
days I did my best to r est and r ecover, hoping my body
would settle somewher e close to equilibrium. W e wer e
staying at the W ynn, and on that thir d mor ning I went for a
jog to see if I had anything in the tank. One mile  later, my
heart w as in my thr oat, and I shut it down. I walk e d back to
the ho tel, knowing that despite what the doctors said, I was
sick and suspected that whatever I had was  serious.
Later t hat nig ht, af ter seeing a movie in the V egas suburbs, I
felt we ak as we str olled to  a nearby r estaurant, the Elephant
Bar . My mom was a few paces ahead and I saw her in
triplicate. I clenched my e yes shut, r eleased them,  and ther e
wer e s till thr ee of her . Sh e held the door open fo r me and
when I stepped into the cool conﬁnes, I felt a bit better . W e
slid into a bo oth opposite one another . I was too un steady to
r ead the menu and ask ed her to or der for me. F r om ther e, it
got worse, and when the  runner showed up with our food,
my vis ion blu r r ed again. I strained to open my eyes wide and
felt woozy as my mother look ed to be ﬂoating above the
table.
“Y ou’r e going to have to c all an ambulance,” I said, “because
I’m going  down.”Desperate fo r some stability, I laid my head on the  table, but
my mo m didn ’t dial 911. S he cr ossed to my side an d I leaned
on her as we made our way to the hostess stand and then
back to  the car . On the way I shar ed as much of m y medical
history as I could r ecal l, in short bursts, in ca se I lost
consciousness and she di d have to call for help. L uckily, my
vision and ener gy impr oved enough for her to drive me to
the emer gency r oom  herself .
My thy r oid had been ﬂagged in the past, so that’ s the ﬁrst
thing the doctors e xplor ed. Many Navy SEALs have thyr oid
issues when they r each th eir thirties, because whe n you put
motherfuck ers in e xtr eme envir onments lik e Hell W eek and
war, their hor mone levels go haywir e. When the thyr oid
gland is suboptimal, fatigue, muscle aches, and weakness
ar e among mor e than a dozen major side eﬀects, but my
thyr oid levels wer e close to nor mal. My heart check ed out
too . The ER docs in V egas told me all I needed was  r est.
I went back t o Chicago and saw my own doctor who or der ed
a battery of blood tests . His oﬃce tested my endocrine
system and scr eened m e for L yme, hepatitis, Rheumatoid
arthritis, and a handful of other autoimmune diseases.
Everything came back clean e x cept for my thyr oid which was
slightly suboptimal, but that didn’t e xplain how I’d morphed
so f ast fr om an elite athle te capable of running hundr eds of
miles into a pr etender who could bar ely muster the ener gy to
tie his shoes, let alone run a mile without ver ging on
collapse. I was in medical no - man ’ s - land . I lef t his oﬃce with
mor e questions than answers and a pr escription for thyr oid
medication.
Each d ay that went by I felt worse. Everything wa s crashing
on me. I had tr ouble get ting out of bed, I was co nstipated
and ac hy . They took mor e blood and decided I had A ddison’s
disease, an autoimmune illness that occurs when youradr enals ar e drained and your body doesn’t pr oduce enough
cortisol, which was common in SEALs because we’r e primed
to run on adr enaline. My doctor pr escribed the ster oid
Hydr ocortisone, DHEA, and Arimide x among other meds, but
taking his pills only accelerated my decline, and af ter that,
he and  the other doctors I saw wer e tapped out. The look in
their eyes said it all. In their minds, I was either a crazy
hypochondriac, or I was dying and they didn’t know what
was killing me or how to heal  me.
I fought thr ough it the best I could. My cowork ers didn’t know
anything abo ut my decline because I continued to show no
weakness. My whole life I’d been hiding all my insecurities
and trauma. I k ept all my vulnerabilities lock ed down
beneath an ir on veneer, but eventually the pain b ecame so
bad I couldn’t even get o ut of bed. I called in sick and lay
ther e, staring  at the ceiling, and wonder ed, could this be the
end?
P eering into the abyss sent my mind r eeling back thr ough
the days, weeks, years, lik e ﬁngers ﬂipping thr ough old ﬁles.
I found  all the best parts  and tack ed them together into a
highlight loop  str eamed on r epeat. I gr ew up beat down and
abused, ﬁlter ed uneducated thr ough a system tha t r ejected
me at every tur n, until I took ownership and started to
change. Sinc e then I’d been obese. I was ma r ried and
divor ced. I had two heart  sur geries, taught myself to swim,
and lea r ned to run on br o k en legs. I was ter riﬁed of heights,
then took up high altitude  sk y diving. W ater scar ed the living
shit o ut of me, yet I became a technical d iver and
underwater navigator, which is several degr ees of diﬃculty
beyond scub a diving. I competed in mor e than sixty ultra
distance races, winning s everal, and set a pull - up  r ecor d. I
stutter ed thr o ugh my early years in primary school and gr ew
up to become the Navy SEALs’ most trusted public speak er .
I’d served my country o n the battleﬁeld. Along the way Ibecame driven to mak e sur e that I could not be deﬁned by
the ab use I was bor n into  or the bullying that I gr ew up with.
I wouldn’t be deﬁned by talent either, I didn’t have much, or
my own fears and  weaknesses.
I wa s the sum total of the obstacles I’d over come. And even
though I’d told my story to students all over the country, I
never stopped long enough to appr eciate the tale I told or
the life I’d built. In my mind, I didn’t have the time to waste. I
never hit snooze on my l ife clock because ther e was always
something else to do . If I work ed a twenty - hour  day, I’d work
out for an hour and sleep for thr ee, but I made s ur e to get
that m otherfuck er in. My brain wasn’t wir ed to appr eciate, it
was pr ogrammed to do work, scan the horizon, ask what’s
ne xt, and get it done. That’s why I piled up so many rar e
feats. I was always on the hunt for the ne xt big thing, but as I
lay the r e in bed, my bod y taut with tension and thr obbing
with pain, I had a clear idea what was ne xt for me. The
cemetery . A f ter years of abuse, I’d ﬁnally shr edded my
physical body beyond  r epair .
I was  dying.
F or we eks and months, I sear ched for a cur e to my medical
mystery, but in that moment of catharsis I didn’t feel sad
and I didn’t feel cheated. I was only thirty - eight  years old,
but I’d  lived ten lives and e xperienced a hell of a lot mor e
than most eighty - year - olds . I wasn’t feeling sor ry for myself .
It made sense that at some point the toll would come due. I
spent hours r eﬂecting back on my jour ney . This time, I wasn’t
sif ting thr ough the Cookie Jar while in the heat of battle
hoping to ﬁnd a tick et to victory . I wasn’t leveragi ng my life
assets towar d  some new end. No, I was done ﬁghting, and all
I felt was  gratitude.
I w asn’t meant to be this person! I had to ﬁght myself at
every tur n, and my destr oyed body was my biggest tr ophy .In that moment I knew it didn’t matter if I ever ran again, if I
couldn’t operate anymor e, or if I lived or died, and with that
acceptance came deep  appr eciation.
My ey es welled with tears. Not because I was afraid, but
because at my lowest point I found clarity . The kid I always
judged so harshly didn’ t lie and cheat to hurt anyone’s
feelings. He did it for acceptance. He br ok e the rules
because he didn’t have  the tools to compete and was
ashamed for  being dumb. He did it because he needed
friends. I was afraid to tell the teachers I couldn’t r ead. I was
ter riﬁed of the stigma associated with special education, and
instead of coming down on that kid for one mor e second,
instead of chastising my younger self, I understoo d him for
the ﬁrst  time.
It w as a lone ly jour ney fr om ther e to her e. I missed out on so
much. I didn’t have a lot of fun. Happiness wasn’t my
cocktail of choice. My bra in had me on constant blast. I lived
in fear and doubt, ter riﬁed of being a nobody and
contributing nothing. I’d judged myself constant ly and I’d
judged everyone else ar ound me, too .
R age i s a powerful thing. F or years I’d raged at the world,
channeled al l my pain fr o m my past and used it as fuel to
pr opel me into the motherfucking stratospher e, but I couldn’t
always cont r ol the blast radius. Sometimes my rage
scor ched people who wer en’t as str ong as I’d become, or
didn’t work as har d, and I didn’t swallow my tong ue or hide
my judgment. I let them know, and that hurt some of the
people ar oun d me, and it allowed people who didn’t lik e me
to aﬀe ct my military car eer . But lying in bed on that Chicago
mor ning in the fall of 2014, I let all that judgment  go .
I r eleas ed myself and everyone I ever knew fr om a ny and all
guilt and bitter ness. The long list of haters, doubters, racists,
and abusers  that populated my past, I just couldn’t hatethem anymo r e. I appr eciated them because the y helped
cr eate me. And as that feeling str etched out, my mind
quieted down. I’d been ﬁghting a war for thirty - eight  years,
and no w, at what look ed  and felt lik e the very end, I found
peace.
In this life ther e ar e countless trails to self - r ealization , though
most demand intense dis cipline, so very few tak e them. In
souther n A frica, the San people dance for thirty hours
straight as a way to co mmune with the divine.  In T ibet,
pilgrims rise , kneel, then str etch out face down on the
gr ound befo r e rising again, in a ritual of pr ost ration for
weeks and months, as they cover thousands of miles befor e
ar riving at a sacr ed temple and folding into deep meditation.
In Japan ther e’s a sect of Zen monks that run 1,000
marathons in  1,000 days in a quest to ﬁnd enlightenment
thr ough pain  and suﬀering. I don’t know if you could call
what I felt on  that bed “e nlightenment,” but I do know that
pain unlocks a secr et doorway in the mind. One tha t leads to
both peak perfor mance and beautiful  silence.
A t ﬁrst, when you push beyond your per ceived capability
your m ind w on’t shut the fuck up about it. It wants you to
stop so  it sends you into a spin cycle of panic a nd doubt,
which only ampliﬁes your self - tortur e . But when you persist
past th at to the point that pain fully saturates the mind, you
become single - pointed . The e xter nal world zer oes out.
Boundaries dissolve and you feel connected to yourself, and
to a ll things, in the depth of your soul. That’s what I was
af ter . Those moments of total connection and power, which
came thr ough me again in an even deeper way as I r eﬂected
on wher e I’d come fr om and all I’d put myself  thr ough.
F or hours, I ﬂoated in th at tranquil space, sur r ounded by
light, feeling as much gratitude as pain, as much
appr eciation as ther e was discomfort. A t some point ther everie br ok e lik e a fever . I smiled, placed my palm s over my
watery eyes and rubbed the top and then the ba ck of my
head. A t the base of my neck, I felt a familiar knot. It bulged
bigger than ever . I thr ew oﬀ the covers and e xamined the
knots above my hip ﬂe x ors ne xt. Those had gr own  too .
Could it be that basic? Could my suﬀering be link e d to those
knots? I ﬂashed back to a session with an e xpert in
str etching and advanced physical and mental training
methods the SEALs br ought to our base in Cor onado in 2010
named Joe Hippensteel. Joe was an undersized decathlete in
college, drive n to mak e the Olympic team. But when you’r e a
5’8” guy going up aga inst world - class  decathletes who
average 6’3” that isn’t easy . He decided to build up  his lower
body so he c ould over ride his genetics to jump higher and
run faster than his bigger, str onger opponents. A t one point
he was squatting twice his own body weight for t en sets of
ten r e ps in one session, but with that incr ease in muscle
mass c ame a lot of tensi on, and tension invited injury . The
har der he trained, the m or e injuries he develope d and the
mor e p hysical therapists he visited. When he wa s told he
tor e his hamstring befor e  the trials, his Olympic dr eam died,
and he r ealized he neede d to change the way he trained his
body . He began balancing his str ength work with e xtensive
str etching and noticed whenever he r eached a certain range
of mot ion in a given mu scle gr oup or joint, whatever pain
linger ed, vanished.
He became his own guinea pig and developed optimal
ranges of motion for every muscle and joint in the human
body . He never went to the doctor or physical therapists
again because he found his own methodologies much mor e
eﬀective. If an injury cr opped up, he tr eated himself with a
str etching r e gimen. Over  the years he built up a clientele
and r e putation among elit e athletes in the ar ea, and in 2010,
was intr oduc ed to some Navy SEALs. W or d spr ead at NavalSpecial W arfar e Command and he was eventually invited to
intr oduce his  range of motion r outine to about two dozen
SEALs. I was one of  them.
As he lectur ed, he e xamined and str etched us out. The
pr oblem with most of the guys, he said, was our overuse of
muscles with out the appr opriate balance of ﬂe xi bility, and
those issues traced back to Hell W eek, when we wer e ask ed
to d o thousands of ﬂutter kicks, then lie back in cold water
with w aves washing over us. He estimated it would tak e
twenty hours  of intensive str etching using his pr otocol to get
most of us b ack to a no r mal range of motion in the hips,
which can then be main tained, he said, with just twenty
minutes of str etching every day . Optimal range of motion
r equir ed a lar ger commitment. When he got to me he took a
good look and shook his h ead. As you know, I’d tasted thr ee
Hell W eeks. H e started to str etch me out, and said  I was so
lock ed up it was lik e trying to str etch steel  cables.
“Y ou’r e gonna need hundr eds of hours,” he  said.
A t the time, I didn’t pay him any mind because  I had no
plans to tak e up str etchin g. I was obsessed with str ength and
power, and everything I’d  r ead suggested that an incr ease in
ﬂe xibility meant an equal and opposite decr ease in speed
and fo r ce. The view fr om my death bed alter ed my
perspective.
I pu lled myself up, stagge r ed to the bathr oom mir r or, tur ned,
and e xamined the knot on my head. I stood as tall as I could.
It lo ok ed lik e I’d lost not o ne, but nearly two inches in height.
My range of motion had never been worse. What if Joe was
right?
What  if?One of  my mottos these d ays is peaceful but never satisﬁed .
It was one thing to enjoy the peace of self - acceptance , and
my acceptance of the fuck ed - up  wo rld as it is, but that did n’t
mean I was g oing to lie do wn and wait to die without at least
trying to save myself . It  didn’t mean then, and it doesn’t
mean now, that I will accept the imperfect or just plain wr ong
without ﬁghting to change things for the better . I’d tried
accessing the mainstr eam mind to ﬁnd healing, but the
doctors and their drugs d idn’t do shit e x cept mak e me feel a
whole lot worse. I had no other car ds to play . All I could do is
try to str etch myself back to  health.
The ﬁr st post ur e was simple. I sat on the gr ound and tried to
cr oss my legs, Indian style, but my hips wer e so  tight, my
knees wer e up ar ound my ears. I lost my balance and r olled
onto my back. It took all my str ength to right myself and try
again. I stayed in position for ten seconds, maybe ﬁf teen,
befor e straightening my legs because it was too damn
painful.
Cramps squeezed and pinched every muscle in my lower
body . Sweat oozed fr om my por es, but af ter a sh ort r est, I
folded up my legs and took mor e pain. I cycled thr ough that
same str etch on and oﬀ for an hour and slowly,  my body
started to open. I did a sim ple quad str etch ne xt. The one we
all lear n to do in middle school. Standing on my lef t leg, I
bent my right and grabbe d my foot with my right hand. Joe
was ri ght. My quads wer e so bulk y and tight it was  lik e
str etching steel cables. A gain, I stayed in the postur e until
the pain was a seven out of ten. Then I took a sh ort br eak
and hit the other  side.
That standing  postur e helped to r elease my quad and str etch
out my psoas. The psoas  is the only muscle conn ecting our
spine to our lower legs. It wraps ar ound the back of the
pelvis, gover ns the hips, and is known as the ﬁght or ﬂightmuscle. As you know, my  whole life was ﬁght or ﬂight. As a
young kid dr owning in to xic str ess, I work ed that muscle
overtime. Ditto during my thr ee Hell W eeks, R anger School,
and Delta Selection. Not  to mention war . Y et I never did
anything to loosen it up, and as an athlete I continued to tap
my sympathetic nervous system and had been grinding so
har d my psoas continued to stiﬀen. Especially on long runs,
wher e sleep deprivation and cold weather came into play .
Now, it was trying to chok e me fr om the inside out. I’d lear n
later th at it had tilted my  pelvis, compr essed my spine, and
wrapped my connective t issue tight. It shaved two inches oﬀ
my height. I spok e to Joe about it  r ecently .
“What was happening to you is an e xtr eme case of what
happens to 90 per cent of the population,” he s aid. “Y our
muscles wer e so lock ed up that your blood wasn’t cir culating
very well. They wer e lik e a fr ozen steak. Y ou ca n’t inject
blood into a fr ozen steak , and that’s why you wer e shutting
down.”
And it wouldn’t let go without a ﬁght. Each str etch plunged
me int o the ﬁr e. I had so much inﬂammation an d inter nal
stiﬀness, the slightest movement hurt, say nothing of long
hold po ses m eant to isolate my quad and psoas. When I sat
down and did the butterﬂy str etch ne xt, the tortur e
intensiﬁed.
I str etched for two hours that day, wok e up sor e as hell, and
got back af ter it. On day two I str etched for six fu ll hours. I
did the same thr ee poses over and over, then tried to sit on
my heels, in a double quad str etch that was pur e agony . I
work ed a calf str etch in t oo . Each session started oﬀ r ough,
but af t er an hour or two  my body r eleased enough for the
pain to ease  up.
Befor e long I was folded i nto str etches for upwar ds  of twelve
hours a day . I wok e up at  6 a.m., str etched until 9 a.m., andthen s tr etched on and oﬀ while at the desk at work,
especially wh en I was on the phone. I’d str etch o ut during
my lunch hour and then  af ter I got home at 5 p.m., I’d
str etch until I hit the  sack.
I came  up with a r outine, starting at my neck and shoulders
befor e moving into th e hips, psoas, glutes , quads,
hamstrings, and calves. Str etching became my new
obsession. I bought a massage ball to tenderize my psoas. I
pr opped a boar d up aga inst a closed door at a  seventy -
degr ee  an gle and u sed it to str etch out my calf . I’d be en
suﬀering for the better part of two years, and af ter several
months of continual str etching, I noticed the bump at the
base of my sk ull had started to shrink, along with the knots
ar ound my hip ﬂe x ors, a nd my overall health and ener gy
level impr ove d. I wasn’t anywher e close to ﬂe xible  yet, and I
wasn’t completely back t o myself, but I was oﬀ all but my
thyr oid medication, and t he mor e I str etched the mor e my
condition impr oved. I k ept  at it for at least six hours  a day for
weeks. Then months and years. I’m still doing  it.
* * *
I r etir e d fr om the military as a Chief in the Navy, in
November 20 15, the only military man ever to be part of Air
F or ce T A C - P , thr ee Navy SEAL Hell W eeks in one year
(completing two of them), and graduate BUD/S and Ar my
R anger School. It was a bittersweet moment because the
military was a big part of my identity . It helped shape me
and mak e me a better man, and I gave it everything I  had.
By th en Bill Br own had moved on too . He gr ew up
mar ginalized lik e me, wasn’t supposed to amount to much,
and even got bounced  fr om his ﬁrst BUD/S class by
instructors who questioned his intelligence. T oday, he is alawyer at a major ﬁr m in  Philadelphia. F r eak Br own pr oved
and continues to pr ove  himself .
Sledge is still in the SEAL T eams. When I met him  he was a
big time boozer, but af ter our work outs his mentality
changed. He  went fr om never running at all t o running
marathons. F r om not owning a bicycle to becoming one of
the fastest cyclists in San Diego . He’s ﬁnished multiple
Ir onman triathlons. They say ir on sharpens ir on, and we
pr oved  that.
Shawn Dobbs never beca me a SEAL, but he did become an
Oﬃcer . He’s a Lieutenant Commander these days, and he’s
still a hell of  an athlete. He’s an Ir onman, an accomplished
cyclist, was honor man in the Navy’s A dvanced Dive School,
and lat er ear ned a graduate degr ee. One r eason for all of his
success is because he’s c ome to own his failur e in Hell W eek,
which means it no longer owns  him.
SB G is  still in the Navy to o, but he’s not messing w ith BUD/S
candidates anymor e. He analyzes data to mak e sur e Naval
Special W arfa r e continues  to become smarter, str onger, and
mor e e ﬀective than ever . He’s an egghead now . An egghead
with an  edge . But I was with him when he was at his physical
peak, and he was a fucking  stud.
Since our dark days in Buﬀalo and Brazil, my mother has also
completely t ransfor med her life. She ear ned a master’s
degr ee in education and s erves as a volunteer on a  domestic
violence task for ce, when she’s not working as a senior
associate vice pr esident at a Nashville medical  school.
As for me, str etching helped me get my powers back. As my
time in the military wound down, while I was still in the r ehab
zone, I studied to r ecertif y as an EMT . Once again, I utilized
my long - hand  memorization skills I’d been honing since high
school to ﬁnish at the top of my class. I also atten ded TEEXF ir e T ra ining A cademy, w her e I graduated T op Honor Man in
my cla ss. Ev entually, I started running again, this  time with
zer o side eﬀects, and wh en I got back into decen t enough
shape, I enter ed a few ultras and r etur ned to the top spot in
several including the Str olling Jim 40- Miler  in T ennessee, and
Inﬁnitus 88k in V er mont, both in 2016. But that wasn’t
enough, so I became a wildland ﬁr eﬁghter in  Montana.
A f ter wrappin g up my ﬁrst season on the ﬁr e lin es in the
summer of 2015, I stopped by my mother’s place in
Nashville for a visit. A t midnight her phone rang. My mother
is lik e me in the sense tha t she doesn’t have a wid e cir cle of
friends and doesn’t get many phone calls during decent
hours, so this was either a wr ong number or an  emer gency .
I could  hear T runnis Jr . on  the other end of the line. I hadn’t
seen or spok en to him in over ﬁf teen years. Our r e lationship
br ok e down the moment he chose to stay with our father
rather than tough it out with us. F or most of my life I found
his decision impossible to for give or accept, but lik e I said, I’d
changed. Thr ough the years, my mother k ept me updated on
the basics. He’d eventually stepped away fr om our father
and his shady businesse s, ear ned a PhD, and became a
college administrator . He is also a gr eat father to his  kids.
I c ould  tell by my mom’s voice that something was wr ong. All
I r eme mber hearing was my mom asking, “ Ar e you sur e it’s
K ayla?” When she hung up, she e xplained that K ayla, his
eighteen - year - old  d augh ter, h ad been hanging with friends
in Indianapolis. A t some point looser acquaintances r olled up,
bad blood boiled, a gun was pulled, shots rang o ut, and a
stray bullet found one of the  teenagers.
When his e x - wife  cal led him, in panic mod e, he dr ove to the
crime scene, but when he ar rived he was held outside the
yellow tape and k ept in the dark. He could see K ayla’s carand a body under a tarp, but nobody would tell him if his
daughter was alive or  dead.
My mother and I hit the r oad immediately . I dr ove eighty
mph thr ough slanted rain for ﬁve hours straight to
Indianapolis. W e pulled into his driveway shortly af ter he
r etur ned fr om the crime scene wher e, while standing outside
the yellow tape, he was ask ed to identif y his daugh ter fr om a
pictur e of her body tak en on a detective’s cell phone. He
wasn’t oﬀer e d the dignity of privacy or time to pay  r espects.
He had to do all that later . He opened the door, t ook a few
steps towar d  us, and br ok e down crying. My mother got
ther e ﬁ rst. Then I pulled my br other in for a hug and all of
our bullshit issues no longer  matter ed.
* * *
The Buddha famously sa id that life is suﬀering. I’m not a
Buddhist, but  I know wha t he meant and so do you. T o e xist
in this world, we must contend with humiliation, br ok en
dr eams, sadness, and loss. That’s just natur e. Each speciﬁc
life comes with its own personalized portion of pain. It’s
coming for you. Y ou can’t stop it. And you know  it.
In r esponse, most of us a r e pr ogrammed to seek comfort as
a way to numb it all out a nd cushion the blows. W e carve out
safe spaces. W e consume media that conﬁr ms our beliefs,
we tak e up h obbies aligned with our talents, we try  to spend
as l ittle time as possible doing the tasks we fucking loathe,
and that mak es us sof t. W e live a life deﬁned by the limits we
imagine and desir e for ourselves because it’s comfortable as
hell in that b o x. Not just f or us, but for our closest family and
friends. The limits we cr eate and accept become  the lens
thr ough which they see us. Thr ough which they love and
appr eciate  us.But for some, those limi ts start to feel lik e bond age, and
when we least e xpect it, our imagination jumps those walls
and hunts down dr eams t hat in the immediate af ter math feel
attainable. Because most dr eams ar e. W e ar e inspir ed to
mak e chang es little by little, and it hurts. Br eaking the
shackles and str etching beyond our own per cei ved limits
tak es har d fucking wor k—of tentimes physical work—and
when you put yourself on  the line, self doubt and  pain will
gr eet you with a stinging combination that will buckle your
knees.
Most people who ar e mer e ly inspir ed or motivated will quit at
that point, and upon the ir r etur n, their cells will feel that
much smaller, their shackles even tighter . The few who
r emain outsid e their walls will encounter even mor e pain and
much mor e doubt, courte sy of those who we thought wer e
our bi ggest fans. When it was time for me to lose 106
pounds in less than thr ee  months, everyone I talk ed to told
me the r e was  no way I could do it. “ Don’t e xpect too much,”
they all said. Their weak - ass  d ialog ue on ly fed my ow n self
doubt.
But it’s not t he e xter nal voice that will br eak you down. It’s
what you tell yourself that matters. The most important
conversations you’ll ever have ar e the ones you’ll have with
yourself . Y ou wak e up with them, you walk ar ound with them,
you go to bed with them, and eventually you act on them.
Whether they be good or  bad.
W e ar e  all our own worst  haters and doubters because self
doubt is a natural r eaction to any bold attempt to change
your life for the better . Y ou can’t stop it fr om bl ooming in
your b rain, but you can neutralize it, and all the other
e xter nal chatter by asking, What  if?
What if  is an e xquisite fuck - you  to  anyone who has ever
doubted you r gr eatness or stood in your way . It silencesnegativity . It’s a r eminder that you don’t r eally know what
you’r e capable of until you put everything you’ve got on the
line. It  mak es the impossible feel at least a little mor e
possible. What if  is the power and per mission to face down
your dark est demons, your very worst memories, and accept
them a s part  of your his tory . If and when you do  that, you
will be  able to use the m as fuel to envision the most
audacious, outrageous achievement and go get  it.
W e live in a world with a lot of insecur e, jealou s people.
Some of them ar e our be st friends. They ar e blood r elatives.
F ailur e ter riﬁes them. So does our success. Because  when we
transcend what we once thought possible, push our limits,
and become mor e, our lig ht r eﬂects oﬀ all the wa lls they’ve
built up ar ound them. Y o ur light enables them to see the
contours of their own prison, their own self - limitations . But if
they ar e truly the gr eat p eople you always believe d them to
be, their jealousy will evolve, and soon their imagination
might hop its fence, and i t will be their tur n to change for the
better .
I h ope  that’s  what this b ook has done for you. I hope that
right now you ar e nose - to - concr ete  with your own bullshit
limits y ou didn’t even know wer e ther e. I hope you’r e willing
to do the work to br eak t hem down. I hope you’r e willing to
change. Y ou’ ll feel pain, but if you accept it, endur e it, and
callous your mind, you’ll r each a point wher e not even pain
can hurt you. Ther e is a catch, however . When yo u live this
way, ther e is no end to  it.
Thanks to all that str etching, I’m in better shape at forty -
thr ee  t ha n I  was in my twenties. Back then I was always  sick,
wound tight,  and str essed out. I never analyzed why I k ept
getting str ess fractur es. I  just taped that shit up. No matter
what ailed my body or m y mind I had the same  solution.T ape it  up and move the fuck on. Now I’m smarter than I’ve
ever been. And I’m still getting af ter  it.
In 201 8 I went back to the mountains to become a wildland
ﬁr eﬁghter ag ain. I hadn’t been in the ﬁeld for th r ee years,
and since then I’d gotten  used to training in nice gyms and
living i n com fort. Some might call it luxury . I was in a plush
hotel r oom in  V egas when the 416 ﬁr e spark ed and  I got the
call. W hat started as a 2, 000- acr e  grass ﬁr e in the San Juan
R ange of Colorado’s R ock y Mountains was gr owing into a
r ecor d br eaking, 55,000- acr e  monster . I hung up and caught
a pr op plane to Grand Junction, loaded up in a U.S. F or est
Service truck , and dr ove thr ee hours to the ou tskirts of
Durango, Colorado, wher e I suited up in my gr ee n Nome x
pants and yellow, long - sleeved  b utton  down, my har d h at,
ﬁeld glasses, and gloves, and grabbed my super P ulaski—a
wildland ﬁr e ﬁghter’s most trusted weapon. I can dig for
hours with that thing, and  that’s what we do . W e don’t spray
water . W e specialize in containment, and that means digging
lines and clearing brush so ther e’s no fuel in the path of an
infer no . W e dig and run, run and dig, until every muscle is
spent. Then we do it all over  again.
On our ﬁrst day and night we dug ﬁr e lines ar ound
vulnerable homes as walls of ﬂames mar ched forwar d fr om
less than a mile away . W e glimpsed the bur n thr ough the
tr ees and felt the heat in  the dr ought - strick en  for est. F r om
ther e we wer e deployed  to 10,000 feet and wo rk ed on a
forty - ﬁve - degr ee  slope, digging as deep as possible, trying to
get to the mineral soil that won’t bur n. A t one point a tr ee
fell and missed hitting one  of my teammates by eig ht inches.
It w ould have killed him.  W e could smell smok e in the air .
Our sawyers—the chainsaw e xperts—k ept cutting dead and
dying tr ees. W e hauled th at brush out beyond a c r eek bed.
P iles wer e scatter ed eve ry ﬁf ty feet for over thr ee miles.
Each one measur ed r oughly seven to eight feet  tall.W e work ed lik e that for a week of eighteen - hour  shi f ts at $12
an hour, befor e tax es. It was eighty degr ees durin g the day
and thirty - six  d egr e es at night. When the shif t was over we
laid out our mats and slept in the open wher ever  we wer e.
Then w ok e up and got back af ter it. I didn’t change my
clothes for six days. Most  of the people on my cr ew wer e at
least ﬁf teen years younger than me. All of them wer e har d as
nails and among the very  har dest working people I’ve ever
met. Including and especi ally the women. None of them ever
complained. When we w er e done we’d clear ed a line 3.2
miles long, wide enough to stop a monster fr om bur ning
down a  mountain.
A t forty - thr ee , m y wildland ﬁr eﬁghting  car eer is just getting
started. I love being part of a team of har d motherfuck ers
lik e the m, an d my ultra ca r eer is about to be bor n again too .
I’m just young enough to bring hell on and still contend for
titles. I’m running faster now than I ever have, and I don’t
need any tape or pr ops fo r my feet. When I was thirty - thr ee  I
ran at an 8:35 per mile p ace. Now I’m running 7:15 per mile
very comfortably . I’m still  getting used to this new, ﬂe xible,
fully functioning body, and getting accustomed to my new
self .
My pas sion s till bur ns, but to be honest, it tak es a bit longer
to c hannel my rage. It’s n ot camped out on my home scr een
anymor e, a single unconscious twitch fr om overwhe lming my
heart and head. Now I h ave to access it consciously . But
when I  do, I c an still feel a ll the challenges and obstacles, the
heartbr eak and har d work, lik e it happened yester day . That’s
why yo u can feel my pas sion on podcasts and videos. That
shit is still ther e, sear ed into my brain lik e scar tissue. T ailing
me lik e a shadow that’s trying to chase me down and
swallow me whole, but always drives me  forwar d.Whatever failur es and accomplishments pile up in the years
to com e, and ther e will be  plenty of both I’m sur e,  I know I’ll
continue to give it my all and set goals that seem impossible
to mos t. And when those motherfuck ers say so, I’ll look them
dead in the eye and r espond with one simple  question.
What  if?A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
T HIS  B OOK  W AS  SEVEN  YEARS  IN  THE  MAKING  WITH  SIX  F AILED  A T TEMPTS  AL ONG
the wa y befor e being intr oduced to the ﬁrst, and only, writer
who tr uly un derstood my  passion and captur ed my voice. I
want t o thank A dam Sk olnick for the countless hours spent
lear ning ever ything about  me and my fuck ed-up li fe to help
pull together  all the pieces and bring my story to life in
print. W or ds can’t e xp r ess how pr oud I am of the
truthfulness, vulnerability, and raw candor of this  book.
Jennifer Kish,  I do not have the wor ds. A lot of pe ople say
that, b ut it is the truth. O nly you truly know how har d this
pr ocess was for me to pull oﬀ, and without you by my side
ther e would be no book at all. It is because of you I was able
to tak e  time  oﬀ of writin g to go ﬁght ﬁr es while you took
car e of all the business behind the book. Knowing I had
“ Kish” in my cor ner enabled me to mak e the very ballsy
decision to self - publish ! I t’s because of your work ethic that
I had the conﬁdence to tur n down a substantial book
advance—knowing that you alone can shoulder what an
entir e publishing house c an do! All I can say is t hank you
and I love  you.
My mom, Jackie Gar dner , we have had a har d, fuck ed - up
life. One that we can both be pr oud of because ther e ar e
many times we have been  knock ed ﬂat on our asse s with no
one ar ound to pick us u p. Somehow we found a way to
always get the fuck up. I know ther e wer e many tim es when
you we r e concer ned for me and wanted me to stop, thank
you fo r neve r acting upon your feelings as it allowed me to
ﬁnd mor e of me. F or most people, this is not how you would
talk to  your mother as a thank you, but only you k now how
powerful this message truly is. Stay har d; love you, Mom.My br o ther, T runnis. Our lives and the way we gr ew up at
times made us enemies, but when the shit hit th e fan, we
wer e t her e f or one another . A t the end of the day, that is
true br other hood to  me.
Much appr eciation and thanks to the following people who
allowed A dam and I to i nterview them for this book. Y our
r ecollection of the events helped me cr eate an accurate and
true depiction of my life and how these particular events
unfolded.
My cousin, Damien, while you wer e always the favorite
gr owing up, I had some of my better times in life hanging
out with you just doing stupid  shit.
Johnny Nicho ls, our friendship while gr owing up in Brazil was
the on ly positive thing I had at times. Not many people
know the darkness that I e xperienced as a kid lik e you do .
Thanks for being ther e when I truly needed you  most.
Kirk F r e eman, I want to thank you for your honesty .  Y ou wer e
one of the fe w people who wer e willing to tell the painful
truth a bout some of my challenges in Brazil, and for that I
will for ever be  grateful.
Scott Gear en , to this day, you will never know h ow much
your st ory and you just be ing you helped me at a time in my
life wh er e da rkness was all I could see. Y ou have no idea the
impact you had on a fourteen - year - old  kid. It’s a true saying,
you ne ver know who is watching you. I happened to be
watching you  that day at PJOC school. Grateful for your
friendship af ter all these  years.
V ictor P eña, I have many stories to tell, but the one thing I
will say is that you wer e always ther e thr ough thick and thin
and alw ays g ave everythi ng you had. F or that, mad  r espect,
br other .Steven Schal jo, if it wer en’t for you, ther e might not even be
a book . Y ou wer e the b est r ecruiter in the Navy . Thanks
again for believing in  me.
K enny Bigbe e, thanks for being the other “ Black guy” at
BUD/S. Y our sense of hum or was always right on t ime. Stay
har d, br other .
T o the white David Goggi ns, Bill Br own, your willingness to
go the distance in the ha r dest of times made me better in
the har dest of times. Last time I saw you, we wer e on a
mission in Iraq, I was m anning a .50 cal and y ou wer e
manning an M60. Hope to see you stateside in the near
futur e!
Dr ew S heets, thank you for having the courage to be in the
fr ont of the boat with me in my thir d Hell W eek. V ery few
know h ow heavy that shit is! Who would ever thi nk that a
r edneck and a black guy would become so tight? It’s true
what they say, opposites  attract!
Shawn Dobbs, it tak es a lot of courage to do what y ou did in
this bo ok. I put myself out ther e to the r eader, but you
didn’t have to! All I can s ay is thank you for allowing me to
shar e part of your story . It will change  lives!
Br ent Gleeso n, one of the few guys I know wher e “the ﬁrst
time, every time” truly applies. V ery few will even know
what this means. Stay har d, Br ent!
SB G, y ou wer e one of the ﬁrst SEALs I ever met and you set
the bar high. Thank you for pushing me in all thr ee of my
BUD/S classes and for the quick heart rate monitoring
training  class!
Dana De Coster, to the best swim buddy a guy could ever
have. Y our leadership during my ﬁrst platoon was second tonone!
Sledge, all I can say is that ir on deﬁnitely sharpens ir on!
Thanks for being one of the few guys who got af ter it with
me every fucking day a nd was willing to go ag ainst the
grain and be misunderstood in your quest to get  better .
Mor gan L uttr ell, 2-5! W e will always be connected  fr om our
moment in  Y uma.
Chris K ostman, you unkn owingly for ced me to ﬁnd a whole
other level of  myself .
John Metz, thank you for a llowing an ine xperienced man into
your race. It changed my life  for ever .
Chris R oman, your pr ofe ssionalism and attention to detail
have always amazed me. Y ou ar e a big r eason why I was
able to get thir d in one of the har dest foot races on the
planet.
Edie R osenthal, thank yo u for all of your support and the
amazing work you do for the Special Operations W ar rior
F oundation.
A dmiral Ed W inters, humb led to have work ed with you for so
many years. W orking for an A dmiral deﬁnitely put pr essur e
on me to bring my very best at all times. Thank you  for your
continued  support.
Steve (“W iz” ) W isotzki, justice was done and I thank you for
that.
Hawk, when you sent me that email about “the 13 per cent,”
I knew  we wer e kindr ed spirits. Y ou ar e one of the few
people in this world who understand me and my mentality
without  e xplanation.Doc Sc hr eck engaust, thank you for putting me in  for that
echo . That shit just might have saved my  life!
T ., tha nks for pushing me on that ruck, br other! Continue
char ging.
R onald Cabarles, continue leading by e xample and staying
har d. Class 03-04  RL TW .
Joe Hippensteel, thanks for showing me the pr oper ways to
str etch. It’s truly changed my  life!
R yan De xter, thanks for walking with me for seventy - ﬁve
miles and helping me get to 205  miles!
K eith Kirby, thanks for y our continued support thr oughout
the  years.
Nandor T amask a, thank you for opening your gym to me and
my team for the pull - up  r ecor d. Y our hospitality, kindness,
and support will never be  for gotten.
Dan Cottr ell, to give without e xpecting anything in r etur n is
a rar e ﬁnd. T hank you for allowing one of my dr eam s to be a
jumper in my forties come  true!
F r ed Thomps on, thank you for allowing me to work with your
amazing team this year . I lear ned so much fr om you and
your cr ew . Mad  r espect!
Mar c A delman, thank you for being part of the team fr om
day one and for your cou nsel at every step along the way .
W ay to push past your pe r ceived limitations this y ear . I am
pr oud of all of your  accomplishments!
BrandF ir e, thank you for your cr eative genius and the
cr eation of davidgoggins.com .F inally, my sincer e gratitude and appr eciation  for the
amazing team at Scribe Media. F r om the ﬁrst contact with
T uck er Max to the last a nd every touch point in between,
you an d ever y member of your team over - deliver ed  just as
you said you would! Special thanks to the consummate
pr ofessional Ellie Cole, my P ublishing Manager; Zach Obr ont
for helping cr eate an amazing mark eting plan; Hal Cliﬀor d,
my editor; and Erin T yler, the most talented cover designer I
could ever imagine, who helped cr eate the sick est book
cover of all  time!AB OUT THE AUTHOR
D A V I D  G O G G I N S  is a r etir ed Navy SEAL and the only
member of the U.S. Ar med F or ces ever to complete SEAL
training, U.S.  Ar my R anger School, and Air F or ce T actical Air
Contr oller training. Goggins has competed in mor e than
sixty ultra - marathons , t riathlons,  and ultra - triathlons ,
setting new course r ecor ds and r egularly placing in the top
ﬁve. A for mer Guinness W orld R ecor d holder for completing
4,030 pull - ups  in seventeen hours, he’s a much - sought - af ter
public speak er who’s sh ar ed his story with the staﬀs of
Fortune  5 00 compa nies, pr ofes sional sports teams, an d
hundr eds of thousands of students acr oss the  country .